    
    
ויקרא  אל  משה
    
    
   עקב ענוה יראת ה' עושר וכבוד וחיים, “the result of humility is fear of the Lord, wealth, honour and life.” (Prov.22,4) 12Solomon informed us in this verse that the virtue of humility brings in its wake a number of other virtues. The plain meaning of the text is that the reward to be reaped in this life by people who practice the virtue of humility is four-fold. It consists of 1) fear of the Lord; 2) wealth; 3) honour; 4) long life. The virtue of humility is a virtue practiced with one’s body, a virtue practiced in man’s capacity as an active member of  human society. [A hermit, though undemanding, does not practice this virtue. Ed.]. Practice of this virtue is demonstrated by the owner being reticent and patient, suffering what others would consider insults, etc., without protest. A person who is humble shows respect and honour to other creatures (humans), and speaks well of them and for their benefit. Having trained himself to acquire this virtue it is only a small step to acquiring fear of the Lord. This virtue is an intellectual virtue. A person who has acquired both the virtue of humility and fear of the Lord will automatically acquire wealth, as wealth is defined by our sages as the ability to be happy with what G’d has seen fit to grant one, without being envious of others who appear to have more (compare Avot 4,1). He will also reap honour; this is the meaning of Proverbs 29,23: “the humble in spirit will retain honour.” We have another verse on that subject in Proverbs 18,12 where Solomon writes: “humility goes before honour.” The author meant that the honour bestowed on a person was preceded by his demonstrating true humility.
    Finally, the words: “he will acquire life,” have to be under-stood. He who desires and longs for material wealth is obviously worried all the time he has not yet achieved his objective. When he does achieve part of his desire he is worried that he should not lose it. People who have these kinds of worries contribute to their lives becoming shorter as their worries undermine their health. He who enjoys what he has and is grateful for it will live longer as his peace of mind helps him maintain his physical well-being.
    A Midrashic approach (Jerusalem Talmud Shabbat 1,9): the words עקב ענוה יראת ה' mean that whereas wisdom is considered the crown, humility is considered the heel of one’s shoe. On the one hand, we are told by David (Psalms 111,10) ראשית חכמה יראת ה', normally translated as “the beginning of all wisdom is fear of the Lord,” on the other hand, Solomon (his son) told us that עקב ענוה יראת ה', that the fear of the Lord is a product of humility. The author wanted to teach us by using the word עקב in connection with humility that this virtue is greater than wisdom as it is the product of fear of the Lord. A product is the result of something more primitive preceding it, hence it is more advanced, superior to the ingredients which contributed  to it.
    It is well known that all virtues manifest themselves in opposite extremes. [if I understand the author correctly he means that one can be described as “the most humble,” or as “the least humble;” “the wisest” or “the one most lacking in wisdom,” etc. I suppose that the word “virtue” must then be divided between “positive” virtues and “negative” virtues. The correct translation of the word מדה used by the author then is not “virtue,” but “characteristic.” Ed.] However, in addition to possessing any such characteristic (virtue) in either of these extremes one may also possess it in a degree which is ממוצע, “average,” i.e. somewhere between the extremes we mentioned. The characteristic (virtue) of  humility is such a virtue. The reason that this is so is that it is somewhere in between pride and self-abasement. As a general rule, man should strive to possess these characteristics which are at neither end of the extremes as everything that is extreme is usually something negative. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Deyot 2,2). Concerning this subject Solomon said (Proverbs 4,26) “survey the course your feet will take so that all your ways will be prosperous.” With this warning Solomon wanted to exhort man to pursue paths which lie between two extremes. The very word פלס which he used and which we translated as “survey” is derived from the noun peless, meaning “ balance,” as in the balance of a set of scales. It is in the centre. When keeping this advice in mind, a person will be able to plan his activities properly, giving due weight to all the pros and cons of a situation. Solomon made this crystal clear in the verse following where he said: “do not turn to the right or the left; remove your feet from evil.” The message is that he who veers neither to the right nor to the left of the true path will avoid evil.
    The exception to all this is the manner in which the virtue of humility is to be practiced (compare Maimonides HiIchot Deyot 2,3). When training oneself to acquire this virtue one must endeavour to practice it to the greatest extreme possible. In fact, the extreme of the virtue ענוה is called שפלות, “a kind of debasement practiced relative to one’s posture in the presence of one’s king.” Any attempt to practice the virtue of humility by applying the yardstick of sticking to the middle of the road might give rise to people thinking that one is somewhat overbearing, arrogant. Seeing that arrogance is the very worst of all negative virtues it is clear that one has to make every effort to steer clear of that characteristic. People guilty of arrogance put their afterlife at risk . Concerning this whole subject our sages in Avot 4,4 said: “be exceedingly humble in spirit.” The reason they repeated the word מאד, i.e. “very much,” was to teach the people to practice this virtue in the extreme, as opposed to the other virtues. The reason is also that this is the greatest virtue and it is one which is evident to people with whom one comes into contact. This is why David described himself as possessing לב נשבר ונדכה, “a contrite and crushed heart” (Psalms 51,19), in spite of the fact that he was a powerful king as well as a prophet. He was also the head of the seventy elders who were the Supreme Court of his generation. (this is based on Samuel II 23,8: where our sages (Moed Katan 16) interpret the words יושב בשבת תחכמוני, to mean that when David took his seat amongst the sages he did not sit on a cushion but on the ground. G’d said to him: “seeing you have humbled yourself you are like Me,” a play on the second part of the word תח-כמוני). Moses also, although the most outstanding of the prophets who ever lived, is described by G’d as the “most humble person” (Numbers 12,3). [this editor has always felt that the virtue of humility is reserved for outstanding people as these have something to be proud of. If the likes of us appear humble it only reflects the fact that we have nothing to boast about. This is hardly a positive virtue.] When the Torah also used the adjective מאד to describe the level of Moses’ humility, this was to tell us that he deliberately tried to practice this virtue in the extreme. Anyone who contents himself with practicing the virtue of humility just as he practices other virtues, i.e. following the middle path between arrogance and total self abasement, may quality for the description ענו, but not for the description ענו מאד.
    Seeing that Moses was so humble, he did not want to enter the Tabernacle until G’d had invited him to do so seeing the  Tabernacle was still enveloped in a cloud housing G’d’s attribute כבוד. Even though Moses had been told by G’d that He would meet with him in that Tent and speak to him inside from above the kapporet, from “between the cherubs” (Exodus 25,22), he was afraid to enter; he was afraid to prophecy inside, to pray inside, or to offer sacrifices inside until G’d would give him express permission by calling him and inviting him inside. This invitation was tendered when the Torah writes: “He called to Moses and Hashem spoke to him from the Tent of Meeting, to say.”
    
    1,1. ויקרא אל משה, “He called to Moses, etc.” The word קריאה denotes honour, i.e. the manner in which G’d called out to Moses reflected His fondness of him. The expression is also used when the prophet describes the angels as calling out to each other such as Isaiah 6,3 (compare Rashi.) The very fact that G’d calls out to a prophet establishes the truth of three fundamental tenets of Judaism. They are: 1) the belief in the creation of the universe out of nothing by G’d the Creator. 2) The giving of the Torah to the Jewish people. 3) the belief in the resurrection of the dead. These three tenets of Judaism are connected to the beginning of time (as we know it), to a date within the accepted framework of “Time,” and, finally, an event which will occur at the conclusion of the accepted meaning of the concept of “Time.” Each one of these tenets has a decisive influence on the next one. Prophecy, i.e. the predictions made by a prophet testify to the existence of a G’d who supervises the universe. Such supervision (and control which is an implied part of the term “supervision”) proves that the universe had a beginning, did not precede the Supervisor.” [How could the “supervisor” control something he had not made himself and therefore been privy to its essence? Ed.] Seeing that the universe was created by a Creator who keeps supervising it, it makes sense that the Torah should be given to the people at some point in time in order for the Torah and its observance to guarantee that at the end of time the people could receive the reward for observing its precepts. A period of ultimate and undisturbed delight will be ushered in when the dead are resurrected.
    We find the expression קריאה being used in connection with each of these three tenets. The prophet Isaiah 48,12 writes: “listen to Me Yaakov and Israel  whom I have called (מקראי) I am He- I am the first, and I am the last as well.” In this verse the prophet referred to three separate existences, i.e. “the present, the past, and the future.” Isaiah referred to the giving of the Torah. It is quite evident that on that occasion G’d manifested Himself as being all these three “existences” mentioned by the prophet (compare Mechilta 20,2). This is why the prophet referred to מקראי, “the ones upon whom I have called,” i.e. the people at Mount Sinai. Both the names Yaakov and Israel were mentioned during that revelation when G’d’s instructions were preceded by the words ויקרא אליו ה' מן ההר לאמר כה תאמר לבית יעקב ותגיד לבני ישראל, “G’d called to him from the mountain saying: ‘thus you shall say to the house of Yaakov and tell (at length) to the Children of Israel’” (Exodus 19,3).In other words, G’d “called” to the people during the episode of giving them the Torah. The reference to the creation of the world ex nihilo is mentioned by Isaiah in the very next verse where he writes: אף ידי יסדה ארץ וימיני טפחה שמים אני קורא אליהם יעמדו יחדיו, “My own hand founded the earth, My right hand spread out the skies. I call unto them, let them stand up.” The prophet describes that all parts of the universe are connected to each other integrally by the fact that G’d has created them. Finally, the expression קריאה occurs in connection with the resurrection when David says in Psalms 50,1 and Psalms 50,4 אל אלו-הים ה' דבר ויקרא ארץ ממזרח שמש עד מבואו as well as יקרא אל השמים מעל ואל הארץ לדין עמו, “G’d the Lord spoke and summoned the world from east to west; and He summoned the heavens above, and the earth, for the trial of His people.” Our sages in Sanhedrin 91 commented on this that the words “He called on the heavens above” refer to the soul, whereas the words “and the earth, for trial of His people” refer to the body. David meant that they will have to give an accounting in preparation for the time of the resurrection.
    At any rate, you have seen from the above that the call by G’d to His prophet includes references to the three basic tenets of Judaism which we have mentioned earlier. This is the deeper reason why the third Book of the Torah commences with the word ויקרא. The creation of the universe had been the subject of the opening chapters of the first Book of the Torah; the giving of the Torah had occupied a central section of the Book of Exodus. The subject matter of resurrection is introduced-albeit obliquely- in the Book of Leviticus. The Book of ויקרא includes a reference to the third of these tenets. [The author will elaborate on this when explaining  Leviticus 18,5 וחי בהם. Ed.]
    Know that actually the Torah should have written ויקרא ה' אל משה ויאמר אליו; the fact that the subject of who was speaking i.e. the Lord, was not mentioned indicates that although the Book of Leviticus is a Book in its own right, it is an integral part of what came before it; the entire Torah is one continuous document, a single structure. The word ויקרא is simply a reference to the attribute of כבוד which was last mentioned in Exodus 40,35 when the Torah wrote that this attribute filled the Tabernacle.
    The attribute which called to Moses was the “small” letter א in the word בהבראם In Genesis 2,4. In order to make this clear the letter א in the word ויקרא here is also written small.
    When the Torah continues with מאהל מועד, “from the Tent of Meeting,” our sages in Torat Kohanim 1-2,10 state that the voice of G’d reached only the walls of the Sanctuary and was not audible outside. In order that we should not think that this was due to the voice of G’d being weak, close to a whisper, the Torah wrote הקול with the letter ה in front to teach us that the voice was powerful but that G’d deliberately restricted the sound waves to the inside of the Tabernacle. We have other verses in Scriptures where the word קול ה' occurs, such as in Psalms 29,4-5 קול ה' בכח, קול ה' בהדר, קול ה' שובר ארזים “the sound of G’d’s voice is power; the sound of the Lord’s voice is majesty; the sound of the Lord’s voice breaks cedars, etc. etc.” The letter ה in our verse before the word קול, while referring to a voice which is familiar to us from other occasions, did not mean that the voice of G’d was especially overpowering such as at Mount Sinai, but it simply meant that it was neither weak nor eardrum-shattering. If this is so, why did the Torah write מאהל מועד, “from the Tent of Meeting,” if the voice was not actually heard beyond the walls of the Tabernacle? The fact is that we encounter something similar in Ezekiel 10,5 where the prophet writes: “and the sound of the wings of the cherubs was heard up to the outer courtyard as the voice of El Shaddai when He speaks.” Another verse in which the voice of G’d is mentioned is in Ezekiel 1,24: “Then I heard the sound of their wings like the sound of great waters, like the sound of Shaddai as they moved, the sound of the words like the sound of the company; when they halt they release their wings.” The meaning of these verses is that the prophet Ezekiel compared the heavenly voice to four different phenomena; 1) he compared it to large bodies of waters the sound of which is steady, continuous; 2) he compared it to the voice of Shaddai, a voice which is neither too loud nor too weak. 3) The words “to the sound of a company  (of angels) when they halt they release their wings,” describes the variety of sounds. 4) “The sound of a camp,” describes the sounds of the trumpets when the people in the camp are being alerted to break camp, etc. The remarkable thing was that this voice did not penetrate beyond the walls of the Temple’s courtyard.
    The meaning of כקול אל שדי בדברו in Ezekiel 10,5 is: “similar to the voice of the G’d Shaddai when He was speaking,” It is a reference to the voice of G’d speaking during the revelation at Mount Sinai. That voice had been described as קול גדול ולא יסף, “a great sound which would not be repeated,” in Deut. 5,19, and as נפשי יצאה בדברו, “my soul departed when He spoke” in Song of Songs 5,6. At the time of the revelation G’d’s voice was inaudible beyond the confines of the camp of the Israelites, whereas here it was inaudible beyond the confines of the Tabernacle. The sound of the wings of the cherubs in Ezekiel’s vision were not audible beyond the walls of the courtyard of the Temple.
    When you study the beginning of the Book of Samuel where Samuel is described as being called and the High Priest Eli had not heard the voice which called Samuel, he answered him: “go back to sleep” as he had thought that Samuel had mistakenly though that he, Eli, had called him (Samuel I 3,4). Eli thought hat Samuel’s imagination had played a trick on him. When Samuel experienced a second call Eli realised that Samuel had not imagined the call, but Eli was still not certain whether Samuel had heard a human voice or a divine call. In either event, he, Eli, had not heard any voice. This is why he told Samuel again to lie down and to continue sleeping. Only when Samuel reported hearing a voice calling him a third time did Eli understand that this was a heavenly voice. In the interval Eli had made a point of listening closely, and when he noted that Samuel had heard a voice which he himself had not heard, he realised that an angel had called to Samuel. This is the meaning of “Eli understood that G’d called to the lad” (3,8). Just as we find that voices heard by the prophet addressed by G’d or His angel are not heard by those whom G’d does not address, the same is true of visions which prophets are shown. G’d may show something to a person whom He has selected for that purpose, whereas others standing at the same spot will not experience the vision at all. We have clear proof of this in Daniel 10,7 where Daniel reports a vision he saw (obviously while awake and in the company of others) which the people next to him did not experience. This explains why the plagues inflicted by G’d upon the Egyptians were not noticed by the Israelites as affecting them at all. This was particularly true of the plague of darkness where the Torah states that the Israelites could even see in the very houses in which the Egyptians felt a palpable darkness so that they were unable to move (Exodus 10,23).
    Rabbi Saadyah gaon, in his Emunot Ve-deyot describes the matter in approx. these words: “it is clear that the sound (voice) which the prophet hears is a sort of new creation by the Lord. Whereas ordinary prophets heard this voice of G’d through an angel who was the intermediary, Moses heard it without needing recourse to an angel as his intermediary. In other words, Moses himself took the place of the angel. This is what the Torah meant when it wrote that G’d spoke to Moses “face to face.” This is also what the Torah meant when it reported about Moses אשר ידעו ה', “with whom G’d was on intimate terms.” To remind us of this for all times, the Torah wrote (Deut. 34,10) that “never again did there arise a prophet of the unique qualities of Moses.” Moses was in a class by himself as prophets go through three distinctive features: 1) his prophetic insights were received without intermediary. 2) He was able to respond to prophetic visions immediately, without trepidation, without feeling physically weakened by the mere fact that he had experienced a call from G’d or a vision. Even great prophets such as Isaiah and Ezekiel describe that they were overwhelmed by their visions (Isaiah 6,1, and Ezekiel 1,28). Moses could immediately involve G’d in a dialogue as we know from Exodus 18,19: “Moses would speak and G’d would respond.” 3) Moses saw his prophetic visions by means of a single מחיצה, “screen, or filter, ”whereas other prophets’ visions had been filtered through no fewer than 9 such screens. (based on Vayikra Rabbah 1,14). The fact that Moses did not need multiple “screens” or “mirrors” making such visions into riddles is spelled out in Numbers 12,8. On the other hand, Ezekiel and Daniel, for instance, needed 9 such “filters.” (They are quoted as using these words “such as the vision which I have seen no fewer than nine times for the same vision.” (Ezekiel 43,3). The word “vision” is in the plural on one occasion). The same is true in Daniel 10,5, 10,7-8. What Ezekiel and Daniel saw as מחיצות, barriers or filters, is described in the Torah by the word חידות in the verse from Numbers 12 which we quoted earlier. Thus far Rabbi Saadyah gaon.
    You will have to appreciate now that the nine filters mentioned by Rabbi Saadyah gaon are not nine different emanations through which these prophetic visions are filtered to the average prophet. Except for Moses, every prophet received his visions only via the tenth (lowest) of the ten emanations. The so-called אספקלריאות, “window-panes,” therefore are merely different levels of prophecy. Ezekiel already referred to this when he said (Ezekiel 1,4)  “I looked, and lo a stormy wind came sweeping out of the north- a huge cloud and flashing fire, surrounded by a radiance; and in the centre of it, in the centre of the fire, a gleam as of amber. In the centre of it were also the figures of four creatures.” In verse 26 of the same chapter, the prophet describes that above  the  expanse over their heads was the semblance of a throne as well as a human-like figure. Altogether the prophet described 9 different “semblances.” רוח סערה, ענן גדול, אש מתלקחת, נוגה, חשמל, אופנים, חיותת רקיע, ראשי החיות, דמות כסא. We have here 9 separate “visions” which form the details of what the prophet had first described as מראות אלוהים, as “visions of G’d,” in verse one of the first chapter of his book. Having concluded these nine “visions” he reports about seeing something resembling מראה אדם, “the appearance of a man.” Moses’ prophetic visions did not have to be filtered through all these stages in order to result in a message to the people whom the prophet is meant to address.
     All the foregoing gives you an idea of the difference between the quality of Moses’ prophetic insights and those of any other prophet after him. There are scholars who understand the “nine visions” enumerated by Ezekiel as allegorical descriptions of ever higher emanations, these emanations being paraphrased as the various planets, each one closer to the celestial centre. The ninth (highest) is perceived as the one that surrounds the attribute of G’d we know as כבוד. The powerful radiations of ever purer forms of light which the prophet saw appeared to him in the form of the respective four chayot. According to these scholars the meaning of our sages’ statement in the Midrash dealing with the story of the creation  that there are chayot in our terrestrial world, i.e. holy beings on earth described by the prophet as chayot hakodesh, ophanim and kisseh hakavod, means that this is the meaning of Isaiah saying in Isaiah 66,1 that “the whole of earth is G’d’s footstool.” What they had in mind specifically was the surface of the moon. [the author continues further in this vein. As I am not certain of his meaning, I have omitted translating those lines. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Vayikra 1-2): The words “He called to Moses,” teach you the meaning of Proverbs 25,6-7: “do not be boastful in the presence of a king, do not stand in the place of great men; for it is better to be told: ‘come up here,’ than to be shamed in the presence of the great.’” Even Moses did not ascend until he had been specifically asked to do so. Our verse also reflects the practical meaning of Proverbs 29,23: “a man’s pride will humiliate him, but the humble in spirit will retain honour.” Anyone who pursues an office because of the authority over others which this will give him, will find that the very authority he was so keen on will escape him. On the other hand, people who try to escape the burden of having authority over others will find that this very opportunity will pursue them. One of the best known examples in Jewish history of humble people who tried to avoid having to wear the mantle of authority was King Saul who “hid amongst the vessels” (Samuel I 10,22) in order not to have to become king. He could not be found until the High Priest consulted his breastplate asking G’d’s help to locate him. The meaning of “the authority runs after him” was proven when in verse 24 of the same chapter in Samuel, the prophet is quoted as asking the people: “have you seen the one whom G’d has chosen (as king)?” On the other hand, Avimelech, son of Gideon was so anxious to establish himself as ruler  that his quest escaped him as we know from Judges 9,1: “Avimelech son of Jerubaal (Gideon) went to his mother’s brothers in Shechem and spoke to them and to the whole clan of his mother’s family. He put this question to all the citizens of Shechem: ‘which is better for you, to be ruled by seventy men-all the sons of Jerubaal- or to be ruled by one man?” Some time later after he had murdered his brothers (verse 24) “G’d sent a spirit of discord between Avimelech and the citizens of Shechem, and they broke faith with Avimelech, etc.” Moses tried to escape the position of leadership of the Jewish people saying to G’d: “I am not a man of words, etc.” (Exodus 4,10). He even asked G’d to appoint another (Exodus 4,13). In the end, the position of authority pursued him as we see from our verse where the Torah reports that “G’d called to him.” When David (Psalms 8,6) describes man as “You (G’d) have made him little less than divine, and adorned him with glory and majesty,” he had in mind Moses to whom such adjectives could be applied. [although generally, commentators use this verse to describe Adam before the fall, our author’s interpretation is more plausible as no one had ever seen Adam in his glory. Ed.]
    
    1,2. דבר אל בני ישראל, “speak to the Children of Israel, etc.”  He told him to tell the Israelites about the rules of the burnt-offering in general terms.
   ואמרת אליהם, “and say to them, etc.” This refers to the details of this legislation. Moses was to inform the people of specific procedures in preparing the burnt-offering, such as removing the skin and cutting the animal into certain parts after slaughtering it and before burning it on the altar. He told them that the slaughtering had to take place north of the altar and the wood pile. He told them who was entitled to slaughter the animal and which kind of wood was permitted to be used to construct the pile keeping fire going around the clock on the altar. In all instances where the Torah uses the sequence דבר ואמרת, the meaning is that Moses was to tell the people the commandment in general terms followed by teaching them the details of the legislation. Examples are to be found in Numbers 15,38 where the Torah introduces the subject of the ציצית, fringes, and then proceeds to give some details about this commandment. The details, which are spelled out in the oral Torah include rules about the number of threads, the way they are to be attached, how many are to be of blue wool, etc., etc. All this is alluded to in the introductory words “and say to them.” Details of the commandments are hardly ever spelled out in the written Torah.
     אדם כי יקריב מכם, “when a man amongst you wants to bring an offering, etc.” According to the grammar of our verse it could be inferred that a human sacrifice is theoretically permissible. If G’d had wanted to rule out such a possibility the Torah should have written אדם מכם שיקריב קרבן, “a man amongst you who wants to offer a sacrifice.” [we have already precluded the suggestion made by the author when we translated the text as we did. Ed.] A closer look at the text will convince even the doubter that such a translation (and meaning) would have been quite impossible. The meaning of the verse is: “if someone amongst yourselves feels the urge to sacrifice himself to the Lord, you are to do this by means of offering a domestic animal such as a specimen from the cattle or the flock. You are not to take a human being as a sacrifice to the Lord.”
    In the event that anyone entertained a doubt about this, this is spelled out beyond the possibility of any doubt in Jeremiah 19,5: where the prophet chastises the people for offering human sacrifices including their children to the Baal, something G’d says: “I have never commanded, never decreed, and which never came to My mind.”
    In view of all that we have said, the Torah was careful to commence the legislation with the word אדם כי יקריב, “a man who will offer an offering,” as opposed to; “becoming the victim of a sacrifice.” Grammarians (such as Ibn Ezra) have viewed the meter of the verse as follows: “אדם מכם שיקריב,“ ”a man amongst you who offers a sacrifice.” We would have a parallel verse in Isaiah 26,11: אף אש צריך תאכלם, “fire will also consume Your adver-saries.” Here too one might have imagined that the subject was “Your adversaries” rather than G’d. The correct translation reverses the relative position of the words אש and צריך. Another example of a similar construction is found in Hoseah 8,2  לי יזעקו אלו-הי ידענוך ישראל, the correct meaning of which is “Israel cries out to Me: ‘O my G’d we are devoted to You.’” The translation assumes that the prophet had meant: לי יזעקו ישראל  אלו-הי ידענוך, the prophet refers to the impudence of the Jewish people, who, though unrepentant, claim that they were devoted to the Lord. A similar inverted verse is found in Exodus 22,8 אשר יאמר כי הוא זה, “concerning which one party says ‘this is it.’” Instead of writing כי זה הוא, the Torah in its wisdom chose to write כי הוא זה. There are numerous other examples in Scripture of what appear to be inverted constructions.
    Tanchuma Tzav 1 comments on this verse that the reason that the Torah chose the word אדם [rather than איש as is usual, Ed.] is to teach that just as when Adam offered a sacrifice he used an animal which was his, was not illegally acquired (seeing he owned all of the earth), so any offering to G’d must be legally owned by the person offering it else it is not only not pleasing to the Lord but displeasing. Isaiah 61,8 spells this out more precisely when he quotes G’d as שונא גזל בעולה, “I hate robbery with a burnt-offering.”
   קרבן לה', “an offering to the Lord.” Whenever the expression קרבן לי-ה-ו-ה  is written, the name of the Lord used is the tetragram to make certain we do not offer heathens an excuse to rebel against G’d and the word קרבן  precedes the word לה'  so as to preclude the idea that first one would offer a sacrifice to one of the attributes of G’d, i.e. the attribute of Mercy, in order to subsequently offer a second offering to the attribute of Justice believing it to be an independent power (compare Sifra Vayikra 2,5).  Our sages in Sifra Vayikra 2,4 conclude from the wording of the Torah here that when a person sanctifies, i.e. donates an animal as a sacrifice, he is not to say  לה' עולה, or לה' מנחה, “for the Lord a burnt-offering”, or “for the Lord a meal-offering,” but he is to use the formula עולה לה', or מנחה לה' “a burnt-offering for the Lord,” or “a meal-offering for the Lord,” as the case may be. Actually they arrived at this ruling using simple logic. If a person who is about to present G’d with an offering is warned not to utter the Lord’s name in vain [before specifying what it is all about, in the event he never gets to complete the sentence, Ed.] then how much more so must one be careful not to use the name of the Lord in vain or even frivolously when one does not do so in connection with sanctifying something for the Lord.
   מן הבהמה, “from the domestic animals.” The word בהמה is restrictive and excludes free-roaming animals known as חיות from being suitable as offerings on G’d’s altar. One of the reasons for this is that whereas the domesticated animals are victims by definition, the majority of the free-roaming animals are the hunters, the pursuers, the ones which victimise their prey (Tanchuma Emor 9). The rule that free-roaming animals are not fit for the altar prompted our sages (Shabbat 88) to say: “it is better to belong to the category of people suffering insults than to be part of the group of people insulting others.” No bird suffers more pursuit than the turtle-doves and the pigeons, yet the Torah has included these birds amongst those fit for the altar. It is therefore established that both amongst the mammals and the fowl the Torah stipulated that only species which are prone to suffer persecution are permitted as sacrifices on the altar of the Lord. Our sages brought also scriptural proof for their statement when they quoted Judges 5,31 ואוהביו כצאת השמש בגבורתו, “but may those who love Him be as the sun’s rising might.” The thrust of this whole verse (conclusion of Devorah’s song of thanksgiving and victory) is that she referred to the ones who had suffered insults as the ones beloved of G’d and compared them to the sun. The sun was the first creation of the Lord to endure insult when (according to Chulin 60) the moon complained that it could not share prominence with it. [The sun is not on record as responding to this complaint. Ed.] Seeing that the light of the sun is so superior to that of the moon, -considered its reward for suffering in silence- these suffering animals too were elevated in being allowed to give their lives on the altar of the Lord, making what would have been an inevitable death anyway a meaningful death. It is incumbent upon man to learn from this legislation concerning who is chosen as fit to be a sacrifice
    It is interesting that whereas Yitzchak sent Esau to hunt game, Rivkah sent Yaakov to the sheep to select a domesticated animal as food for her husband. These animals share the characteristic of תמימות, being flawless in character, with Yaakov whom the Torah described as תמים, flawless. This characteristic is described by Onkelos as שלים, “peaceful, harmonious,” in Genesis 25,28 where the Torah describes the difference between Esau and Yaakov. This תמימות, flawlessness, is the hallmark of Torah which is described as תורת ה' תמימה, “the Torah of the Lord is flawless,” and its paths are described as harmonious, שלום, (Proverbs 3,17).” The word שלום as a proper name for the Jewish people occurs in Song of Songs 7,1 where Solomon calls on Israel saying שובה שובה השולמית, “turn back, turn back O Shulamit!” The reason Israel has been accorded this title is that the eventual everlasting peace will be ushered in in the land of Israel. For the above-mentioned reasons G’d selected the domesticated pure mammals as suitable for His altar whereas He rejected the free-roaming beasts, even the ones which are permissible for us to eat such as deer, etc.
    Esau was considered as far removed from the sun (the horoscope of the sun) being a hairy man, a man who made his home in the desert, as already characterised by his father Yitzchak who described him as יודע ציד איש שדה, “familiar with hunting, a man of the field” (Genesis 25,27). He showed a preference for the free-roaming animals that live in uncivilised areas, signifying destruction and desolation. Such an environment is the opposite of the environment which bespeaks peace and harmony. This is also the reason the Torah forbade that stones which had been treated with iron (metal) tools should form part of the altar as such tools are reminiscent of the sword, of causing death instead of ushering in peace, the purpose of the altar. (compare author’s comments on Exodus 20,22). The sword became the inheritance of Esau and his descendants. This is the mystical dimension of Exodus 20,22: “for you have swung your sword over it and desecrated it.” [The author has a different count for the number of verses in the Ten Commandments due to the tone-signs which are used when reading the text, so that in his commentary Exodus 20,22 is referred to as 20,25. Ed.] Seeing that it is the function of the altar to help man live longer whereas the function of the sword is to shorten the life span of those who come in contact with it, it is only logical that such an instrument or one which symbolises it should not be used in constructing the altar.
    Our sages also derive from the words מן הבהמה, מן הבקר, ומן הצאן, “from the domesticated animals such as cattle or flocks,” that the word בהמה excludes any animal which has been mated with a human being; the word מן הבקר is meant to exclude any cow or ox which has been used in idolatrous rites; the words מן הצאן exclude even animals which have been designated for idolatrous service though none such has as yet been performed with them. The extra letter ו in the words ומן הצאן, excludes animals which have gored a human being to death but against which there is not enough evidence to carry out the penalty of stoning prescribed by the Torah (compare Sifra 2).
    
   אם עולה קרבנו מן הבקר, “if his burnt-offering is from the cattle, etc.” The burnt-offering is the first of all the offerings mentioned and discussed in some detail. According to the plain meaning of the text  this is logical as before one sins in deed one generally sins in thought. It was therefore appropriate to mention this burnt-offering which atones not for sins committed but for sins of omission such as positive commandments, i.e. sins committed only in one’s mind.
    The order in which the Torah lists these animals commences with the bull, פר, followed by צאן, smaller animals such as sheep and goats, followed by birds. The bull is the animal which is appropriate for a wealthy man who seeks some kind of atonement seeing that it costs more. Wealthy people often rely on their wealth, itself a sin of arrogance. In order to counter the arrogance involved in relying on one’s material wealth the Torah expects the wealthy man to offer a costly animal. People of moderate means are expected to offer sheep or goats as burnt-offerings, whereas the poor is allowed to offer a pigeon, an inexpensive bird as a burnt-offering. In this way people of different means will each use something commensurate with their financial status as appropriate to atone for their  sins of omission.
    A kabbalistic approach: The עולה type of offering is mentioned first as it corresponds to the emanation of בינה. The sequence of the types of offerings mentioned parallels the emanations in descending order, so that the peace-offering is immediately below the burnt-offering, followed by the offering when the High Priest has become guilty of a sin, i.e., a sin-offering. These three stages correspond to the first three attributes of the thirteen attributes in Parshat Ki Tissa. [at this point the author quotes a non-existent verse meant to support this idea. I cannot understand this. Ed.]
    
    1,4. וסמך ידו על ראש העולה, “he is to place his bodily weight on the head of the animal serving as the burnt-offering.” It is well known that this procedure has to be carried out with both hands as this is what Torat Kohanim says in connection with Leviticus 16,21: “and Aaron is to place both his hands on the head of the scape-goat.” This verse is used as applicable for all animal offerings requiring this procedure. Thus far Torat Kohanim.
    When the Torah writes in this instance that וסמך ידו, “he shall place his hand (sing.),” this is meant to exclude the messenger, intermediary. Although we have a general rule that a person’s messenger enjoys the same legal status as the person on whose behalf he acts, this is an exception. The owner of the animal cannot delegate the requirement to place his own hands on the animal. The placing of the hands on the animal by the owner was performed only in the part of the Tabernacle called Azarah, the courtyard. It was immediately followed by the slaughter of the animal. It was mandatory to place one’s entire weight on the animal using both one’s hands; this is why the Torah wrote: “on the head of the animal,” i.e. not on its neck or any other part.
    
    1,5.  ושחט את בן הבקר, ”he will slaughter the  bull, etc.” We have a tradition (Sifra Vayikra 4,2) that slaughtering the sacrificial animal by a non priest (layman) was in order. This is the reason the Torah wrote the word: “he will slaughter,” without being precise as to who will perform this procedure. In other words, “anyone.” Whenever the Torah defines procedures in the plural, such as “they will sprinkle,” “they will burn, etc.,” it invariably refers to priests who have been mentioned previously in that context. If such a plural is followed by a singular such as in verse 6, והפשיט את העולה, “he will skin the burnt-offering;” this means that whoever had performed the last procedure will continue with the present procedure. [the author has to show that the use of the singular does not always mean that a non priest could perform such a procedure. Ed]. The reason that the Torah uses the word בן בקר  all of a sudden instead of the word פר used to describe a 
bull previously, is that the age of the animal, i.e. not over 2 years old is  meant here. The term עגל, calf, is used for animals up to one year old, whereas the term פר indicates that the animal is in its third year. Whenever the Torah speaks of כבש or כבשים, one year old sheep (male) are meant, whereas the two year old male sheep are called איל. 
    Rabbi Meir (in Rosh Hashanah 10) claimed that when the Torah speaks of עגל without adding that it is one year old, what is meant is a one-year old calf. When the Torah speaks of בן בקר a two year old bull is meant. When the Torah speaks of פר without specifying further, a three year old bull is meant. In Torat Kohanim (Sifra Vayikra 3,6) we are taught that the reason anעגל  is a one year old calf is that the Torah speaks in Leviticus 9,3 of “a one year old calf and a one year old sheep.” The reason we know that the term בן בקר applies to a two year old bull is also because the Torah writes in 9,2 עגל בן בקר לחטאת ואיל לעולה תמימים, “a two year old male calf as sin-offering, and a ram as burnt-offering, they are to be flawless.” Just as the calf mentioned there is two years old so the ram is two years old. Just as both have to be flawless, so both have to be of the same age (approx.). Thus far Torat Kohanim. However, speaking of male goats, when it is referred to as שעיר without adjective it is under one year old. Once it is a year old it is referred to as שעיר עזים.
    
    1,7. ונתנו בני אהרן הכהנים אש על המזבח, “the sons of Aaron, the priest are to place fire on the altar.” Our sages in Yuma 53 state that the only sin which brought about the death of the sons of Aaron was the fact that they made a religious/ritual ruling on their own authority when they should have consulted their elders Moses and/or Aaron. What did they read in the Torah which caused them to make this statement? They referred to our verse. The sons of Aaron took this verse as proof that although heavenly fire was expected to descend from heaven to consume the offerings on the altar, it was still a commandment to also contribute man-made fire. Their reasoning was correct but it was not their prerogative to make such a ruling. Rav Saadyah gaon writes concerning this matter that Nadav and Avihu erred  when they thought that our verse means that man-made fire was to be placed on the altar “from the outside.” The word ונתנו in our verse is equivalent to ובערו, “they shall burn.” The word ונתנו is used in that sense in Isaiah 37,19: ונתון את אלוהיהם באש, “they have committed their gods to the flames.” Rav Saadyah uses this example of the error committed by Nadav and Avihu to stress how careful one has to be when trying to derive halachic rulings from the written text of the Torah. If people of the stature of Nadav and Avihu could make such a fatal error in understanding the text of the Torah, how much more likely is it that scholars of lesser distinction can make such errors! Had they troubled themselves to confirm with their teachers Moses or Aaron that their interpretation was correct they would not have brought death upon themselves. The mishap which resulted from the error of the sons of Aaron accounts for the fact that Jewish scholars are so careful in repeating the lessons they have learned from their teachers by using the same words. This principle has been made into a rule in Ediyot 1,3: “a person is obligated to repeat what his Rabbi said by using the same words.” If such care is in place when one merely repeats the words of one’s teacher, how much more so is it incumbent upon each one of us not to misquote a single word from the written Torah! If someone nevertheless changes the wording of the Torah the prophet Jeremiah 23,36 said concerning such people that “they pervert the words of the living G’d.”
    Concerning this whole subject Jeremiah 23,33-36 writes: “when this people- or a prophet or a priest- asks you: ‘what is the message of the Lord?’ You shall answer them “what is the message? I will cast you off- declares the Lord. As for the prophet or priest or layman who shall say ‘the message of the Lord,’ I shall punish that person and his house. You shall speak to each other, everyone to his fellow, ‘what has the Lord answered? Or “what has the Lord spoken?’ But do not mention ‘the message’ of the Lord anymore.” Does a man regard his own word as “a message?” According to Rav Saadyah gaon the meaning of Jeremiah is that none of his listeners are allowed to put their own interpretation on the prophet’s words or to paraphrase his words. The only person allowed to interpret the word of G’d is the prophet to whom it was addressed. If the people would take it upon themselves to re-interpret G’d’s message they would become guilty of perverting G’d’s words.
    
    In verse 36 the prophet Jeremiah used three words extolling G’d; he spoke of Him as “the living G’d,” as “the Lord G’d of Hosts,” and as “our G’d.” The first description of G’d by the prophet as “the living G’d” was a reference to G’d revealing Himself at Mount Sinai. At that time the people had heard His voice, proof that He was alive. Moses had challenged the people in Deut. 4,33 when he asked them if ever a nation had become privy to such an experience as hearing the living G’d? When Jeremiah referred to G’d as “the Lord G’d of Hosts,” he had in mind the second pillar of Judaism, the belief in prophets to whom G’d had transmitted specific messages (compare Zecharyah 7,12). Jeremiah’s referring to G’d also as “our G’d,” אלו-הינו, was a reference to the G’d of the patriarchs. The expression had been used in Joshua 24,17 where Joshua in his parting address to the Jewish people reminds them of their history and implores them to never forget how that attribute of G’d took them out of  Egypt and looked after them every step of the way. The terms employed by Jeremiah for describing G’d are proof of how important it is to use the same terms that one’s teacher had used. Rav Saadyah gaon understands the word ונתנו in our verse as equivalent to the Arabic for “they shall burn,” just as in Leviticus 6,5: “and Aaron shall kindle wood on it every morning.”
    
    1,8. את הנתחים ואת הראש, ”the various pieces including the head, etc.” The head had not been part of the animal which had been skinned as it had already been severed from the rest of the animal at the time of slaughter. This is why the Torah had to mention the head especially (Sifra 4, 6,3). In that case, why did the Torah have to mention the פדר, “fat-parts,” separately also? This was to tell us that the head together with the fat-parts were to be burned after the area where the head had been slaughtered had been covered with the fat-parts.
    The expression פדר, which means “at-parts,”is a translation of the word פרד, i.e. the same letters in reverse order. This is an allusion to the fact that these fat-parts separate (פדר) between the lower and upper intestines. The whole procedure was to make it as dignified as possible seeing the area where the head had been severed had become bloody and dirty. Even nowadays, when people barbecue animals on the spit, they cover the head separately as mentioned by Nachmanides.
    
    1,9. והקטיר הכהן את הכל המזבחה, עולה אשה ריח ניחוח לה', “and the priest shall cause all of it to burn up on the altar, it is a burnt-offering, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the Lord.” According to the plain meaning of the text the entire purpose of the legislation concerning animal-sacrifices is for man’s benefit. G’d takes a delight in His most perfect creation, i.e. man, for whose sake the entire universe has been created. The purpose of the species is to be so governed by its intellect that it will remain free from sin just like the angels in heaven (who have no evil urge. Ed.)
    If, perchance, man does commit a sin, due to the evil urge which has been planted within man, it is appropriate that he repent and recognise his inadequacy vis-a-vis his Creator whose will he transgressed. Such a sinner must turn inward recognising that the sin he committed affected both his body and his spirit. Seeing that everything man does involves three components, the physical deed, the planning, and his power of speech, i.e. communicating his thoughts, the Torah commanded man to bring a sacrifice to atone for his sin and to place his hands (weight) on the sacrificial animal in order to atone for the physical action involved in the sin committed. He has to confess the sin with words in order to make up for having misused the power of speech given to him when he committed a sin. He has to burn up the inner organs of the animal including the kidneys, seat of his thoughts, in order to make up for the faulty thinking which resulted in his committing a sin. In this manner the atonement will involve three stages just as commission of the sin involved three separate parts of his personality.
    Strictly speaking, the sinner’s own blood should have been sprinkled on the altar in order for him to obtain forgiveness; however, by performing the rites set out by the Torah, G’d, in His generosity, accounts this for the sinner as if his own blood had been sprinkled on the altar. Man is to think of these procedures in those terms when his sin-offering is being burned up.
    By rights, most people are guilty of the four death-penalties decreed by the Torah for a variety of sins, i.e. stoning, death by burning, death by asphyxiation, and death by the sword. When the priest takes the animal and forces it to the ground in preparation for slaughter this symbolises the penalty of death by stoning. It is as if the sinner had agreed that he himself is deserving of this penalty. When the animal is slaughtered and its neck is severed it is as if the sinner had confessed that he himself was guilty of such a penalty. Severing of the windpipe of the slaughtered animal is equivalent to performing the death penalty by asphyxiation, whereas burning up of the fat parts, etc., is equivalent to the owner/sinner admitting that he himself was guilty of that penalty.
    Tanchuma Shelach 14 explains the concept of animal sacrifice in a similar way when writing about Genesis 22,13 where the Torah reports Avraham as sacrificing the ram as a burnt-offering in lieu of his son.” The word תחת used by the Torah, which we translated as “in lieu of,” is the cause of the Midrash saying that whenever Avraham prepared a part of that animal either its blood or its fat-parts, etc., he first recited a prayer beginning with the words: “may it be Your will O Lord that the sacrificial service I am about to perform should be considered as if it had been performed on my son. The animal’s blood should be considered as Yitzchak’s blood, its body which is being burned as if Yitzchak’s body had been burned.” G’d accepts the sinner’s offering in place of the sinner and grants him atonement. This is an expression of G’d’s great love for His creatures. This explanation of the purpose of sacrifice is one that satisfied one’s heart even though it appears to limit the value of animal sacrifice to sin or guilt-offerings.
    The fact that the Torah calls such a sacrifice as “a fire-offering of sweet odour for the Lord,” reflects the love with which G’d relates to a repentant sinner. [these sacrifices and the atonement that follows are restricted to unintentionally committed sins. Ed.]
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Pinchas 12). Assaph writes in Psalms 50,12: “if I were hungry I would not tell you, for Mine is the world and all it holds.” In verse 9 in the same psalm we read: ‘I will not take (claim) from your estate a single bull, no he-goats from your pen, for Mine is every animal of the forest, the beasts on a thousand mountains.” Rabbi Simon said thirteen different attributes of G’d’s mercy have been recorded seeing the Torah writes: “the Lord passed in front of him (Moses) etc.” (Exodus 34,6). Is there then anyone who can be called merciful if he entrusts His own food-supply to the cruel (i.e. man)? The idea that G’d would let man decide how much food and what kind of food to feed G’d is so totally ridiculous as not being worth discussing! This is the meaning of Palms 50,12, i.e. we are to read it as a question highlighting the absurdity of G’d making man the arbiter of how much He should consume!
    Rabbi Yehudah son of Simon said that G’d told man that He had put 10 categories of domesticated (non-carnivorous) beasts at his disposal, 3 of which were easily accessible to him i.e. oxen (cattle) sheep and goats (Deut. 14,4). The other 7 categories are: the hart, the deer, the yachmur, the akko, the dishon, the teo, and the zamir. Seeing they are difficult for you to access I have not demanded that you offer to Me the pure animals which are free-roaming. The only ones which I have asked you to use as sacrificial animals are the ones that feed on your trough, i.e. have ben domesticated by you, the ones you do not have to hunt. This is the meaning of the verse: “If I am hungry I would not tell you.”
    Rabbi Yitzchack drew attention to the verse in Numbers 28,2 את קרבני לחמי, “My sacrifice, My bread, etc.” Can one then speak of G’d “eating” or “drinking?” You should learn a lesson from what we know about the ministering angels. David writes in Psalms 104,4: “His messengers are fiery flames.” To the question what sustains the ministering angels, i.e. what kind of food to they subsist on, the answer given is that they are sustained by the זיו השכינה, “the brightness and splendour of the Shechinah, as we know from Proverbs 16,15 באור פני מלך חיים, “in the light of the king’s face there is life.”
    Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “we can learn all this directly from what the Torah told us about Moses. We have been told in Exodus 34,28 that while Moses was on Mount Sinai he neither ate bread nor drank water. If Moses, while only on a mission for G’d did not need physical food, how much less does G’d Himself need such food? This is the meaning of “if I were hungry, I would not tell you (to supply Me.).”
    A rational approach: the matter of animal sacrifice and why it is useful may be understood in terms of the origin of the sin. Whether a sin is committed only in the mind or is actually carried out, the source of such sin is some spirit of impurity which has infected man’s soul. If man desires atonement for his sin it is essential that he expel this spirit of impurity first. If he succeeds in doing this he will be cleansed from his guilt. This is why in the case of a sin-offering it is incumbent upon him to offer the animal which symbolises such impurity, i.e. the goat or he-goat. When the animal is consumed the impure spirit of the sinner is consumed at the same time. and is burnt up on the altar. This is what the Talmud Yuma 21 had in mind when it spoke of “fire consuming fire,” i.e. the fire of the altar consumes the fire, (evil urge) which was burning in man when he committed the sin. This quality of the fire on the altar is so important that the Torah commanded that this fire never be allowed to go out (Leviticus 6,5 and 6,6).
    In the third section of Moreh Nevuchim chapter 32, item 47 Maimonides writes concerning the reason behind the animal sacrifice legislation that the Torah wanted to uproot pagan practices amongst the Jewish people and that by sublimating the animal sacrifice ritual this could be achieved. The most important part of the legislation was that instead of sacrifices of living creatures being offered to idolatrous forces in temples dedicated to forces of nature, the Jew would learn to dedicate all he had to dedicate to the one and only G’d. The idolaters had imagined that by what they were doing they could reinforce the power of their respective horoscopes by offering their sacrifices to them and that in turn their horoscopes would bestow their largesse upon them or at least protect them against harmful influences.
    When the Egyptians worshipped the image of a sheep they did so in the knowledge that the horoscope of the sheep was of great influence in the celestial regions. They felt that the blessings bestowed on earth by means of flocks originated with that zodiac sign. It was generally perceived that essential food products such as milk, butter, etc., were all the “gift” of zodiac signs in the celestial regions. If the Egyptians did not want to be shepherds (compare Genesis 46,34), this was because they felt that acting as if they owned their “gods” was an insult to these gods who they perceived of as being the providers of their essential foodstuffs.
     What applied to the Egyptians and their sheep applied to the Chaldaens and their attitude to cattle. They perceived the zodiac sign of the ox to be the source responsible for their food-supply. As a result they forbade that cattle be slaughtered, and abstained from eating beef. Indians still cling to such beliefs today and do not slaughter cows, (hence the expression “holy cow.”) This is why G’d commanded that just these species be sacrificed to G’d. This is why the Torah commenced the section dealing with animal sacrifice by referring to a person’s desire to offer מן הבקר ומן הצאן, “from the cattle or the flock” (1,2). The Torah wanted to let us know that these species were considered as so important in determining the fates of the heathens of those days. Henceforth, these very species would be featured in obtaining forgiveness for the trespasses committed by the Jewish people unintentionally. Faulty philosophies, i.e. religious beliefs, can be forgiven only when one reverses course. By dedicating the very thing one used to dedicate to idolatrous causes to a sacred cause approved by G’d, or better still, commanded by G’d, atonement for one’s former errors becomes possible. Diseases of the body are healed, i.e. reversed, when the balance of the body is restored by the person suffering from the disease reversing course, i.e. negating intake of what brought on the disease, etc. The same is true for spiritual imbalances which resulted in idolatrous philosophies. The Torah’s principal concern is the combating of false philosophies, false perceptions of who rules the universe and who has created it. This is why such sacrifices became “a fire-offering of pleasant odour to the Lord.” When the people unite in order to serve the Lord instead of idols, they thereby strengthen the unity of G’d. Idolatry, by definition, is the opposite of unity, in particular of the the concept of the unity of G’d. This is the approach of Maimonides and his followers to the subject of animal sacrifice.
    However much one might be tempted to accept Maimonides’ theory, the fact remains that righteous people long before the Torah had been given were in the habit of offering animal sacrifices not to idols- but to the one and only G’d. All of this preceded the times when idolatrous practices were introduced. Adam offered animal sacrifices (Chulin 60); Hevel, his son, also offered sheep, i.e. animal sacrifices (Genesis 4,4). Noach and his sons offered numerous animal sacrifices as thanksgiving after the deluge from which they had been saved (Genesis 8,21). G’d is on record as responding to these sacrifices by describing them as ריח ניחוח, “pleasant smelling odour.” All this occurred long before there were any Egyptians or Chaldaens.
    The whole subject of animal sacrifice dating back as it does to the first man is a subject replete with mystical significance. It contains hidden elements of the interrelations between different parts of G’d’s creation. We have touched upon this in the introduction to our commentary to the Torah under the heading “the fourth method.” All those who do understand these matters are duty-bound to conceal their knowledge and not publicise it indiscriminately. This knowledge may only be revealed for the sake of the Creator’s honour to selected individuals, exceptionally pious persons. David already indicated in Psalms 19,11 that the words of G’d which are sweeter than honey are for the ones who have displayed thorough understanding. Anyone lacking such attributes will find these mysteries of the Torah as exceedingly remote. These words are considered as עתיקים, dating back to primeval times (based on Chronicles I 4,22); they are like deep waters which cannot be explored by just anybody.
    A kabbalistic approach sees in the word קרבן itself an allusion to G’d’s Unity. The word suggests that all of G’d’s various attributes are very close to one another just as His names are very close to each other, all part of One Unity. Anyone offering a sacrifice thereby reinforces this fabric of G’d’s Unity. This is the mystical dimension of the words והקטיר הכהן את הכל המזבחה, “that the priest will ensure that the All will be going up in flames on the altar.” The additional letter ה at the end of the word המזבחה does not wish to confuse us but is meant to explain a concept. That letter represents the final letter ה in the tetragram and as such it symbolises the attribute which “receives.” It is therefore also called מזבח. From this altar ideas rise higher and higher until in the course of their “rising” they become progressively more purified, end up as מחשבה טהורה, pure thoughts. We find similar constructions both in Chronicles II 29,27 where King Chiskiyah instructed the priests to offer burnt-offerings not למזבח but להמזבח, the extra letter ה alluding to the same concept as in our verse. Another example of this concept is found in Psalms 20,4 where David speaks about the ashes of the gift-offerings being received by G’d; he says ידשנה instead of ידשן, the extra letter ה conveying the same idea as the letter ה at the end of the word המזבחה in our verse. [In his chapter on כנויים, the meanings of well-known words or terms, the author of Pardes Rimonim defines he word קרבן as another word for the Shechinah seeing that the function of the Shechinah is to gather together all the “threads” and emanations so that after being gathered together they form a unity, i.e. demonstrate that they did not exist as independent ideas, entities, but all originate in the same whole. This may make the author’s words easier to understand. Ed.]
    In our verse the Torah describes the result of the sacrificial rites being performed as עולה, אשה ריח ניחוח. The word עולה describes the smoke from the burned up parts of the animal rising heavenwards as far as the region represented by the letter ה in the word המזבחה which we just mentioned. Having reached that level, this very letter ה (i.e. what it represents) helps that offering to rise ever higher into the celestial regions. Once the smoke has ceased rising, the meat turns into fire; this is why the Torah added the description אשה, “a fire-offering” to the word עולה, “a burnt-offering,” which rises into celestial regions. Once the fire has burned itself out also, the whole becomes רוח spiritualised in the form of ריח, something that can neither be seen anymore, felt anymore, but can only be perceived by our sense of smell. This spirit is to “pull” the goodwill and the outpouring of it to earth via the attribute of Mercy.
    The whole expression ריח ניחוח לה' may be perceived as related to the word נחה, “came to rest, settled.” We find that in the discussion between the prophet Elijah with his disciple Elisha who had balked at accepting the mantle of prophecy from Elijah unless the latter endowed him with twice as much רוח, spirit, as that possessed by his master Elijah, that the Book of Kings (II 2,15 relates that Elisha’s wish was granted and that this spirit  came to rest on him. In a similar way the objective of the עולה--אשה--ריח ניחוח is to result in the desired divine qualities being bestowed on those who offer the sacrifice (and the whole people in the case of a public offering).
    In Torat Kohanim Sifra Vayikra 1,59 the words עולה--אשה--ריח ניחוח are explained as follows: עולה לשם עולה, אשה לשם אשים,לשם ריח ניחוח, לשם נחת רוח לה', לשם מי שעשה את העולם. The meaning of this cryptic sentence is that the word עולה means that the person offering this sacrifice must intend that it reach the tenth emanation; however this does not mean it should be directed at, i.e. dedicated to that emanation. It means that from that region onwards the thoughts which prompted the offering will become capable of achieving their objective; from that region the offering will enter holy celestial domains.
    The words אשה לשם אשים mean that the offering be addressed to both the “weaker” and the “stronger” attribute of Justice. The meaning is parallel to the Midrash which comments on the words קרבני לחמי “did you think I need the sacrifice as My food?” The meaning is that it should serve to assuage the “injured feelings” of the attribute of Justice; the sinner had offended that attribute by committing the sin which the sacrifice is to atone for. This is all part of G’d saying לאשי, “for My fires,” you bring it to these attributes of Mine. The emanation כבוד will receive the offering from the attribute פחד. We find a parallel statement in the Midrash Zutta on Song of Songs 1,15 on the words הנך יפה רעיתי, where the author interprets the word רעיתי as equivalent to פרנסתי, “My livelihood.” According to the Midrash, G’d said to Israel: “what you are presenting to Me in the form of fire-offerings I view as if it were intended to be My food, My livelihood.” This explains the addition of the letter ה at the end of the word, as normally the word “fire” is written as אש without the letter ה at the end. The letter ה in אשה is basically as superfluous as the letter ה in Psalms 8,8 צנה ואלפים כלם, “sheep and oxen all of them.” The word אשה meaning “woman” is alluded to by the Midrash in Song of Songs which perceives the Jewish people as being G’d’s “provider” by means of their sacrifices. The Midrash reads the word isheh as if the vowel under the letter ש had been a kametz, i.e. making the word into ishah, woman, provider for her husband. Another reason why the word is not spelled merely as אש is so as to draw our attention to the “fifth” emanation (from the tenth down) the emanation of גבורה also known as האש הגדולה, the “great (consuming) fire, the fiery attribute of Justice.” Compare Deut. 5,22 where the expression האש הגדולה occurs.
    When the Torat Kohanim wrote the words ריח לשם ריח הניחוח, it meant that the Torah wants the person offering the sacrifice to concentrate on the heavenly source (seat of pure thoughts) from where all of G’d’s goodness is lavished on earth and G’d’s creatures. It is from that region that these intentions are drawn towards the attribute of Mercy and come to rest on there. [I believe that to sum up it is simpler to say that a sinner must first assuage the attribute of Justice before he can put the attribute of Mercy at ease. One cannot sin and by trying to bypass the attribute of Justice whom one has offended rely on the attribute of Mercy to deal with the attribute of Justice on our behalf instead of addressing it directly. Ed.] 
    Our verse concludes with the word לה' in order to indicate that in the final analysis the goal of the sin-offering is the attribute of Mercy, as unless that attribute were involved in interceding on our behalf no one could stand up to the attribute of Justice by himself. Torat Kohanim phrased this as “to the One who created the universe,” as without the existence of and active intervention by the attribute of Mercy the world such as we know it would not endure seeing man is so sinful. We know that already when G’d created the universe using the attribute of Justice, He decided to “co-opt” the attribute of Mercy in order to ensure that the universe would endure and not self-destruct (Bereshit Rabbah 12,15, see Rashi on Genesis 1,1).
    Every single one of G’d’s attributes is a “beneficiary” of the sacrifices offered to G’d. This “benefit” expresses itself in different parts of G’d’s attributes drawing closer together. This is the reason why when the Torah speaks about offerings and instructs us to bring sacrifices we so often find the expression להקריב, “to bring close.” The reference is not only to the donor achieving closeness with G’d but to the various attributes of G’d to draw closer to His essence. This is the reason it is called קרבן, something which results in drawing near.
    It is important to appreciate the deeper meaning of the halachah expounded in Yuma 21 that although heavenly fire would consume the sacrifices on the altar, it is incumbent on the priest to also contribute man-made fire. When the two kinds of fire intermingle this is a reminder that through the act of sacrifice man can establish close bonds with the attribute of Justice. Just as the two fires become one so the will of G’d (attribute of Justice) and the will of man will become one when man has demonstrated his desire to come close to G’d and to do so by following the rules laid down by G’d. Just as the rising smoke from activities performed by man on earth comes close to G’d, so, as a result of reciprocity by G’d, His largesse will filter down to us here on earth. The important thing is to utilise the proper conduits provided for all this by the Torah. When we do so we are perceived as if lighting candles. The author illustrates the sequence of what occurs as follows: when one places two candles one on top of another, man lights the lower candle by means of his sacrifice. As the smoke from the sacrifice rises, the upper candle will be lit by the warmth of the flame contained in the smoke of the lower candle.
    It is also important to reflect on why the burnt-offering, עולה, always had to be a male animal, whereas the sin-offering always had to be a female animal, and the peace-offering could be either male or female. The reason is connected to the destination of the burnt-offering, עולה, which is beyond a realm in the celestial regions where male and female emanations or attributes are separated. The domains to which the עולה offering is addressed does not know the distinction of פועל ומקבל, an active and a passive, receiving agent. The peace-offering on the other hand, could be ether male or female seeing that it was addressed to the קו האמצעי, the line in the diagram of the emanations which re-unites the male and the female forces. This is also why the very term שלמים reminds us of its purpose to be משלים, to perfect, to unite that which had been apart, had been separated. I have already mentioned this on Genesis 46,1. It follows that in connection with the peace-offering the Torah writes: אם זכר אם נקבה, “be it male or female.”
    The reason the sin-offering must be a female animal is that it addresses the attribute שמור, a word which refers to negative commandments, commandments which are violated by not guarding, not observing them, i.e. by ignoring the commandment שמור. No activity is required to fulfill a negative commandment. One does so by remaining passive, i.e. female. An activity is required to violate it. The reverse is true of positive commandments. One has to perform an activity in order to keep a positive commandment. Remaining passive vis-a-vis a positive commandment is tantamount to violating it. This leaves us with the problem why the guilt-offering called אשם which is to atone for violating certain negative commandments had to be a male animal rather than a female. According to the logic we presented it should also be an animal of the female category. [The author’s comments on this, assuming that the אשם atones for sins for which the penalty is karet is untenable as only the חטאת atones for such sins. I have decided not to speculate and amend the author’s words but to omit them. Ed.]
    The sinner who has to bring an אשם in order to exonerate himself has to direct his sacrifice to a higher celestial region than people guilty of a חטאת sin-offering. Hence this sacrifice has to be a male animal. The saying of the sages in Berachot 34 that “the place where repentant sinners stand is one where even perfectly righteous people (those who never sinned) cannot stand,” is meant for the kind of people who rehabilitate themselves by means of the אשם offering.
    
    1,11. על ירך המזבח צפונה, “on the side of the altar, at the northern side.” Our sages (Baba Batra 25) say that the world is like a small house and the north wind can turn only inside its confines. It is just  like a three-legged stool which cannot stand properly and requires a fourth leg (Berachot 32). The sacrifices may be viewed as if they supplied the fourth leg for the stool called the universe. This is also the meaning of Psalms 48,3 that ירכתי צפון קרית מלך  רב, Mount Zion, summit of Zaphon, city of a great king.” [without Mount Zion the world would not be able to function properly. Ed.] When the Mishnah in Zevachim 47 asks “where is the correct site to slaughter the sacrificial animals?” The answer given is that the most sacred sacrifices had to be slaughtered on the north side of the altar. Surely it is preposterous to assume that the editor of that Mishnah did not know something as elementary as this, i.e. that these animals had to be slaughtered in the holy precincts of the Temple! However, the inquiry concerned in which direction of the precincts of the Temple (on which side) did this slaughtering have to take place? The scholar editing the Mishnah answers that it had to take place on the north side (if the animals were of the type called קדשי קדשים, the most sacred ones). The Mishnah cites our verse here where the north side is made mandatory for the slaughtering of the עולה offering, one of those called קדשי קדשים as proof.. When the Mishnah continues that the blood of the עולה has to be sprinkled על בין הבדים, “between and above the staves,” the meaning is that the officiating priest has to stand between the staves of the Holy Ark while sprinkling both above and below the thickness of the kapporet. In other words, the blood had to be sprinkled in the direction where the Shechinah was located between the outstretched wings of the cherubs. This corresponds to what is written in Song of Songs 1,13 בין שדי ילין, literally: (“he will sleep between my breasts”). However, the words בין שדי derive their profound meaning from the individual letters of the expression. The letters ש-ד refer to the שני בדים, two staves by means of which the Ark was carried. The whole expression is to be viewed as an allegorical comparison of the intimacy which existed between G’d and the Jewish people.
    We are told in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 3 that four directions (of the compass) were created in the world. Light originates from the east; beneficial dew as well as beneficial rains originate in the south, whereas snow, hail, cold and heat and normal rain originate in the west. Whereas G’d had “created” i.e. initiated the north also, He did not assign to it any specific function. G’d reputedly said that anyone who claimed to be a deity should prove his ability by assigning a useful function to the north, i.e. the corner of the universe that He had left incomplete.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word צפונה is a reference to the attribute of גבורה,  i.e. it is meant to be perfected still. [In order for man to perfect himself, such as to atone for his sins, he needs to turn northwards. Ed.] This is what is meant in Zevachim 53 that the officiating priest ascended the ramp called כבש, i.e. that the entire structure  (the world) was called כבש. [The priest’s actions were perceived as steps in bringing completion and perfection to our terrestrial universe by means of ceremonies and rituals performed as part of the sacrificial rites. The Kabbalah sees in the walk around the altar by the priest and in the direction in which he walks such symbolic significance. Ed.] Avraham’s journey through the Holy Land described in Genesis 12,9 mentioning also a southward journey is considered a parallel to the priest’s manner of walking on the altar when performing his service in the Temple. The priest awakens the attribute of חסד, love, in G’d. This is why he has to start out in the south (like Avraham proceeding southwards. This means that Avraham embarked on his mission for mankind from a southerly direction.) Having aroused G’d’s love he turns to the east the seat of תפארת, the emanation harmony from where the attribute of Mercy emerges. From there he turns northwards in order to make his peace also with the attribute of גבורה, the attribute of Justice. From the north he turns westwards the site of the emanation מלכות, the emanation representing the עולם העשיה, our terrestrial part of the universe. This is the deeper meaning of the statement by our sages in Baba Batra 25 that the Shechinah resides in the west. Having completed this circle, he addresses himself to the world of the angels, the disembodied creatures. As a result of the priest’s performing this procedure the terrestrial world will enjoy G’d’s blessing. Having reached the westernmost part of his walk, the priest returns to the south, the place from which he started out at the base of the כבש.
    
    1,14. מן התורים או מן בני היונה, “from the turtledoves or the pigeons.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah first mentions the fully grown birds of the species, i.e. the turtledoves, as they mate and represent דבקות, the attachment of the Jewish people to its partner, i.e. G’d. It is a remarkable fact that when a female turtledove has lost its mate it will never mate again. Similarly, Israel, having once established an intimate relationship with G’d will never exchange Him for any other deity. This is the reason why under-age doves are not considered as fit  to serve as an offering. On the other hand, mature pigeons are not fit to serve as an offering as they have developed a sense of jealousy, having mated, and therefore represent the opposite of דבקות, attachment. Jealousy is the cause of separation, friction etc.; it is not a characteristic we wish to draw attention to when offering a sacrifice to G’d. When pigeons are offered, the halachah insists that they be young ones which have not yet mated.
    The reason that the Torah did not permit chickens to serve as sacrifices although they are pure birds and serve as our food, is because they mate indiscriminately, unlike the turtledoves and pigeons. Neither roosters nor hens keep faith with their partners.
    A kabbalistic approach: Turtledoves originate in water. The mature ones have been selected to serve as sacrifices to demonstrate the need for the attribute of חסד in all aspects of life on earth. The pigeon’s origin is fire. Concerning the יונה, pigeon, David writes in Psalms 68,14 ואברותיה בירקרק חרוץ, “its pinions in fine gold,” the golden colour around the neck of mature pigeons represent the negative characteristic of man pursuing gold as a material asset. Gold’s colour simulates the colour of fire. The repetition of the letters רק in ירקרק alludes to the severity of the Judgment. On account of such considerations mature pigeons, may not serve as a sacrifice. Young pigeons are acceptable as they have not yet displayed features that remind us of negative characteristics when found in man.
    
    1,16. והסיר את מראתו בנוצתה, “he shall remove its crop with its feathers.” The word מראה refers to the remnants of food particles retained in the crop; the priest took the crop complete with the skin covering it as well as its feathers and threw them to the place reserved for refuse of the altar. The crop by itself was not large enough to make it worthwhile to wash and clean out and subsequently to burn it up on the altar as was done with the intestines of the four-legged animals after they had been cleaned out. Moreover, it is the nature of birds to wander all over and secure their food supply, i.e. to subsist on stolen food, as opposed to the domesticated four-legged animals. To offer the crop while it still contained stolen food was not ethical.
    Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 3,4 phrased it thus: ”concerning the domestic beast which receives its food supply from the trough of its owner the Torah instructs that the innards be washed and subsequently be burned up (verse 13); the bird which feeds on stolen property has its crop (substitute for innards) thrown away  as stolen things are not acceptable as an offering to G’d.”
    The whole matter teaches us an important moral lesson regarding the subject of theft and robbery. Just as G’d wants no part of the part of the body of the bird which receives the stolen food, so G’d wants no part of man  who is guilty of anything similar until he has made full restoration. The prophet revealed to us the severity of this sin when he said (Jeremiah 17,11) “he who amasses wealth by unjust means, in the middle of his life it will leave him (stolen goods), and in the end he will be proved a fool.” “The end” of which the prophet speaks refers to the world to come where such a person will find out that what he did was counterproductive as he will fall from the proximity of G’d’s throne of glory. David already explained elsewhere (Psalms 24,3-4) that the ones who may expect to ascend the mountain of the Lord and the place of His holiness are “those who have clean hands, i.e. whose hands have not been stained with unjustly acquired wealth.”
    
    1,17. ושסע אותו בכנפיו , “he shall split it with its feathers.”  The word בכנפיו, “with its feathers,” means that the priest does not have to pluck the feathers. The word בכנפיו means “literally with its feathers.” Although I could hardly have imagined something more revolting than to have to smell the feathers of burned wings, why then did the Torah legislate that the priest is to ‘bring near,’ i.e. to offer up such an evil-smelling offering? It was in order for the altar to be graced with the offering of a poor man and to make same look more substantial. [the bird offering was an accommodation to people who could not afford a more costly offering. Plucking the bird’s feathers would have made it look even less substantive. Ed.]
    
    2,1.  ונפש כי תקריב קרבן מנחה “When a person offers a meal-offering, etc.” This offering consists of fine flour, oil, and frankincense, as spelled out at the end of our verse. The priest squeezes a fistful in his hand and burns it on the altar whereas the remainder belongs to him personally as stated in verse 3: “the remnant of the meal-offering belongs to Aaron and his sons, it is of the most sacred category of the fire-offerings of Hashem.”
    In our verse the Torah speaks of the priest taking מלא קמצו, “a whole fistful” in order to burn it on the altar, whereas in 6,8 the Torah omits the word מלא, writing only בקמצו. What is the difference? The reason that the Torah varies the description of what is a “fistful” is to teach that there is no objective measurement for what constitutes a קומץ, “fistful.” The priest is not to employ one of the measuring cups used in the Temple to determine weight and measure. The word בקומצו refers to the manner in which he arrives at the correct amount, i.e. he covers the mixture with the middle three fingers of his hand when forming a fist.  Seeing that I could have assumed that even the fingertips of the priest are to be used in forming this “fistful,” the Torah writes מלא קמצו, “what fits comfortably into the palm of his hand.”
    Menachot 11 describes that the priest wipes the excess mixture from the palm of his hand with his thumb and little finger respectively. The procedure is described as very difficult to perform, in fact one of the procedures requiring extreme dexterity by the priest performing it.
    Rashi comments that the Hebrew word קמץ describes the lair of an animal (based on Nachum 2,13 and the Targum there of the words וימלא טרף חוריו, ”he filled his lair with prey”). When following this approach the word קמץ symbolises the precious prey in an animal’s lair.
    It is remarkable that the Torah introduces the subject of the meal-offering by writing נפש כי תקריב. What kind of person volunteers a meal-offering, i.e. a very inexpensive offering? It is the poor. By introducing the subject of the meal-offering with the word נפש, the Torah teaches that in the eyes of G’d a poor man who offers a meal-offering is considered as if he had offered his very life, i.e. נפשו. The Torah also describes this offering here as “a fire-offering of sweet smelling odour for the Lord.” This expression occurs with all kinds of offerings to teach that quantity does not determine the value of an offering in the eyes of the Lord. All that matters is the intention of the donor to dedicate it to G’d. (compare Menachot 110, אחד המרבה ואחד ההמעיט, “both the one who offers a great quantity and the one who offers a small quantity, etc.”)
    
    2,11. כי כל שאר וכל דבש לא תקטירו ממנו לה', “for you shall not burn up any leavening or fruit-honey as a fire-offering to the Lord.” Maimonides writes in his Moreh Nevuchim 3,46 that the heathens were in the habit of offering leavened products in all their meal-offerings and that they mixed in some honey in all of them. This is why the Torah forbade us to imitate the heathens and it banned these ingredients as offerings to the Lord. This corresponds to something our sages taught in connection with the offering of sacrifices to the Lord on altars known as מצבה, a slab of rock anointed for the purpose. Whereas prior to the giving of the Torah such altars were pleasing in the eyes of the Lord, they became objects which He hated after He had given the Torah to the Jewish people (compare Deut. 16,22 and the hilchot shoftim of Maimonides’ code).
    According to the plain meaning of our text the purpose of the offerings is to atone for one’s sins. Had it not been for the evil urge man would never have committed a sin in the first place. There  would not have been any need for such offerings then. Our sages in Mechilta Pischa 8 commening on Deut. 16,3 לא תאכל עליו חמץ, explain this. The reason that חמץ is not to be eaten at a time when the Passover lamb can be brought (on the 14th of the month of Nissan after noon) is that the lamb atones for the idolatrous practices of the Jewish people prior to the Exodus. G’d wanted to keep anything which reminded the Israelites of the evil urge away from them so that they would not be tempted to return to such practices. Not only chametz, but also honey is a symbol of the evil urge as the letters of the word דבש have the same numerical value as the letters of the word אשה, woman (306). We find that when the first human being, Adam, sinned and G’d asked him how this could be, he blamed his wife, i.e. woman as such saying that “the woman You G’d have given me gave me of that fruit and I ate.” (Genesis 3,12). Clearly, he equated woman with the personification of the evil urge, his temptress. Woman herself said that she had been seduced by the serpent, the creature embodying the concept of the evil urge. This is the mystical dimension of the relationship between woman-the serpent- and the inherent hostility between the serpent and woman, i.e. man born by woman (compare our commentary on Genesis 3,13)
    This is why both leavened goods and honey have generally been declared as unfit to be the means through which man atones for his sin when bringing a sacrifice.
    Another reason for this is the well known statement of our sages that “one cannot immerse oneself in a ritual bath and expect it to cleanse one while holding the source of one’s ritual impurity, i.e. a dead mouse or such like in one’s hand” (Taanit 16).
    A kabbalistic approach: both chametz and honey are symbols of the attribute of Justice as they represent an intensive nature rather than something composed of tempering influences As such, these two phenomena have a tendency to estrange man from the altar rather than to bring him closer to what the altar represents. Hence the Torah writes: “do not use it to burn it up as a fire-offering for the Lord.”
    
    2,13. במלח תמלח, “with salt you shall salt it.”  It would have sufficed for the Torah to write ובכל מנחתך תתן מלח, or תמלח. Why did the Torah use the additional word במלח? The expression במלח תמלח, appears to mean that the salt should be of a controlled quantity and efficiency. On the one hand, it should be assimilated, i.e. dissolve in the moisture contained in the meat; on the other hand, it should not be so potent as to draw all the blood out from the meat. The practice of salting our meat nowadays is meant to simulate what occurred with the sacrificial meat.
    According to the plain meaning of the text the reason for salting sacrificial meat is to ensure that its taste is not bland (compare Ibn Ezra). The Torah teaches us manners with this instruction. Although G’d, of course, does not “eat” the meat, it is not fitting for us to offer Him something as food on the altar which we ourselves would reject as unpalatable. One certainly would not serve unsalted meat to a king of flesh and blood (Berachot 58). The same idea has been expressed explicitly by the prophet Maleachi 1,8 where he asks bitingly: “would you dare offer something (of such inferior quality) to your governor?” 
     Maimonides’ thoughts on this subject, as expressed in his Moreh Nevuchim 3,46 are that the heathens removed all salt from their offerings and they would not offer it as a sacrifice  precisely because it drew the blood from the meat; they considered the blood as the essence of the animal and did not want any of it to be wasted. The Torah wanted to counter these pagan theories; this is why the Torah commanded that every offering brought on G’d’s altar must be accompanied by some salt.
    A Midrashic approach tinged with kabbalah: G’d had concluded a covenant with the waters in the “lower” regions of the universe .at the time these waters were separated from the “upper” waters (Genesis 1,7) that on Sukkot some of these waters laced with salt would be used as a libation on G’d’s altar. This is confirmed by Bereshit Rabbah 5,5 according to which the “lower” waters were called “crying waters” as they accepted the separation from the upper waters only after shedding salty tears. This is reflected in Job 28,11: “He dammed up the streams because they cried so much.” Rabbi Abba said that these waters separated from the upper waters by crying. The reason they cried was that they were saying “woe to us that we did not merit to ascend to the celestial regions where we would be close to our Creator.” In fact they were so upset that they dared to split “the deep” and threatened to ascend with their intrinsic power. G’d became angry at them and forced them back to their realm. We know all this from Isaiah 43,16: “Who made a road through the sea and a path through mighty waters.” Nonetheless, G’d told the “lower” waters that seeing their revolt was motivated by their desire to be closer to Him, He would not allow the upper waters to commence with the song of praise to Him until they had obtained permission from the “lower” waters to do so. This has been confirmed in Psalms 93,4: “more majestic than the sounds of the mighty waters of the sea is the voice of the Lord on high.” What is it that these waters say in order to signify their consent? אדיר במרום ה', “the Lord is majestic on high.” Furthermore, G’d promised the “lower” waters that when the time would come for the Israelites to offer sacrifices to Him on the altar, these would be accompanied by both salt and water libations. We have another Midrash in which the (terrestrial) world is described as divided into one third desert, one third habitable, and one third ocean. The oceans said to G’d: “the desert merited that the Torah was given in it; the habitable parts of earth merited that the Temple was erected on them; what are we going to get?” G’d responded saying that in the future, in G’d’s own good time, the Jewish people would include both salt and water in the sacrificial rites
    A kabbalistic approach: salt contains two forces which are opposites of one another. They are fire and water, the power of warmth, i.e. the sun which dries out the water making the salt congeal, solidify. [I suppose the meaning is that through the heat of the sun which causes such water as the waters of the Dead Sea to evaporate, salt is isolated and becomes identifiable. Ed.] In other words, heat (fire), the opposite of water releases the power of the salt in the water. Seeing that water and fire are the two elements which ensure the existence and continuity of the universe, salt combines these two elements in a certain form. It is the catalyst, so to speak, for water and fire to interact. This is the reason why the Torah writes :
   ולא תשבית מלח ברית ה' אלו-היך מעל מנחתך, “you may not discontinue the salt of your G’d’s covenant from upon your meal-offering.” The reason the Torah calls the salt “the covenant of the Lord,” is because by means of it the covenant will be maintained  or destroyed. You may compare this to a statement in Bereshit Rabbah 14,15: “when G’d saw that man would not be able to survive if He ruled the universe by means of the attribute of Justice exclusively, He co-opted the attribute of Mercy;” in a similar way we may view “salt” either as the instrument of preserving matters or as being the instrument of destruction and making earth forever useless to man. An example was the brimstone and salt which fell on the cities of Sodom, etc. (Jeremiah 17,6; compare also Deut. 29,22).
    Still on the same words: “do not discontinue salt, etc.” Seeing the Torah had already written that every meal-offering consisting of fine flour has to have salt on it, and that every meat-offering  has to have salt on it, why does the Torah once more write the above words? Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra writes that these latter words by the Torah are to be viewed as if they were an oath by G’d who says to The Jewish people: “I who have made a covenant with you beseech you on oath that you shall not discontinue the practice of adding salt to your meal-offerings.” Thus far Ibn Ezra.
    The Torah writes: “you shall offer salt with every one of your sacrifices” as otherwise we would have thought that only meal-offerings such as the showbreads, etc., require that they be salted or accompanied by salt, and that this is the reason the Torah mentioned salt always in connection with the מנחה, the meal-offering. To avoid such an error, the Torah had to write a line saying that salt is to be part of every offering.
    
    3,9. חלבו האליה תמימה, ”its choicest part, the entire tail.” Normally, in Hebrew, the fat which is separated from the meat is called חלב, and it is peeled off the meat which it adjoins. The expression שומן applies to fat which is so much part of the flesh that it is not easily separated. When Moses said (Deut. 32,15) וישמן ישורון...שמנת עבית, “Yeshurun (Israel) has become fat,...you have become corpulent,” he referred to the fact that this “fatness, grossness,” had become an inseparable part of the personality of the Jewish people. We also have a verse in Psalms 63,6 חלב ודשן תשבע נפשי, “I am sated as with rich fat.” Our sages in Chulin 49 describe  this kind of חלב, as תותב קרום נקלף “a sheet or layer which can be peeled off.” The reason they named it thus is because it is like a garment covering the meat. The Hebrew translation of the word תותב is שמלה, “garment, dress.” From all the above it is clear that not only are the terms חלב and שומן different but that these terms describe totally different parts of the animal. Whereas חלב is almost impossible to boil or otherwise make edible, שומן, is an integral part of the meat. It is warm and moist, whereas חלב is cold and dry. Seeing that this is so, we must ask why the Torah describes the tail of the sheep, אליה, as covered with חלב instead of with שומן? This tail does not have any of the fat parts which we defined as typical of those which the Torah describes usually as חלב. The fat of the tail is an integral part of the tail, not peelable. If, on the other hand, we would conclude that here the Torah used the word חלב for something which is really שומן, what are we to make out of verse 17 in our chapter where the Torah commands כל חלב וכל דם לא תאכלו, “you must not eat any fat or any blood?” Surely if the words חלב and שומן are used interchangeably, then that verse prohibits the eating of שומן also, and only red meat is permissible.
    In view of these difficulties we have to understand the expression חלבו האליה תמימה, in the Torah as not referring to שומן but to חלב. Seeing that you will ask: “what חלב is there to be found on this tail?” The Torah means that when one separates the entire tail from the animal, the עצה, spine, to which it is attached will be removed with it (part) together with the considerable amount of חלב found attached to that part of the lower spine. This is how Rav Saadyah gaon explains our verse. He understood the words חלבו האליה as equivalent to חלבו והאליה, “its fat plus its tail.” We find that when enumerating the descendants of man the Book of Chronicles I 1,1 writes: אדם, שת אנוש when clearly the meaning is אדם, שת ואנוש “Adam, Sheth, and Enosh.” The same is true when the Torah enumerates constituent parts of the Tabernacle, writing: קרסיו, קרשיו, בריחיו, ועמודיו ואדוניו (Exodus 39,33). Although the connecting letter ו is omitted a couple of times, the verse is to be read as if the Torah had written it. The same is true of Leviticus 7,37 where the Torah writes לעולה למנחה. Clearly, the Torah did not mean to tell us that the burnt-offering is identical with the meal-offering, but the meaning is: “the burnt-offering as well as the meal-offering.” By the same token no one in his right mind would assume that Ezra (author of Chronicles) would have believed that Adam, Sheth, and Enosh were identical just because the connecting letter ו is absent in the text.
   לעמת העצה יסירנה, “which shall be removed close to the backbone.” The word עצה in our verse is a combination of the words עץ and עצה, “wood” and “counsel.” The word עץ is appropriate as it is hard as wood; the word “counsel” is appropriate as it is located near the kidneys the source of man’s “counsel.”  The tail is to be removed starting at a point above the kidneys. This is the meaning of (verse 10) על הכליות יסירנה, “he is to remove it above the kidneys.”
    4,2.נפש כי תחטא בשגגה , “when a person will sin inadvertently, etc.” The expression נפש includes the body and the invisible life-force. When G’d began to create man in Genesis 2,7 we find that the Torah wrote  וייצר ה' אלו-הים את האדם עפר מן האדמה, “the Lord G’d formed man dust from the soil;” afterwards, the Torah added that “He blew into his nostrils a living soul;” as a result of these two parts being joined together man, i.e. האדם, became a living being, i.e. נפש חיה. In other words, the word אדם means “a combination of body and spirit.” The word הנפש just as האדם refers to a combination of body and spirit. It is important for us to know this so that we appreciate that whatever reward or punishment G’d metes out He metes out to both body and spirit. The spirit alone, or the body alone, are not capable of performing actions which qualify for either reward or punishment. This is the meaning of Leviticus 17,10: ונתתי פני בנפש האוכלת את הדם, “I will set My face against the person eating the blood, etc.” This is clear proof that the Torah calls the combination of body and spirit נפש, as the spirit by itself could not eat, and even if it could, it would not be culpable. When the Torah concludes the above verse it writes והכרתי אותו, “I will wipe him out, etc.” Seeing that the word נפש was treated as feminine at the beginning of this verse, it is clear that the Torah switching from the feminine to the masculine wants to teach us that the term נפש refers to the combination of spirit, נשמה, (feminine) and body i.e. עפר (masculine). In our verse here we also find the Torah using once the feminine כי תחטא instead of כי יחטא, whereas at the same time the Torah speaks of ועשה, “and he committed,” instead of ועשתה, “and she committed.” This grammatically otherwise untenable combination is proof that man is a composition of body and spirit. In the next verse the Torah describes such an unintentional sin by the High Priest with the words: אם הכהן המשיח יחטא, “If the High Priest sins” (all masculine). The formula is in order as the High Priest consists of body and spirit. Seeing that the term נפש has been used by the Torah in Genesis to describe man, we find in a variety of instances that the Torah employs the same term when speaking of a living human being. Whenever this term occurs it never refers to the invisible spirit alone but always to a human being, i.e. a combination of body and spirit. On other occasions when the Torah describes the creature addressed as אדם, what is meant is also this combination of body and spirit. However, in other parts of 
the Bible, we do encounter the term נפש as applying only to the body. Examples are Kings I 20,31 where the servants of Ben Haddad advise their king to surrender himself to the Jewish king, claiming that the soft-hearted King Achav might spare his life. The word נפשך in that line can hardly apply to Ben Haddad’s soul as it was not within the power of Achav to make dispositions of Ben Haddad’s soul. Besides souls are not mortal. When the prophet Bileam wished himself a death such as the death of the righteous (Numbers 23,10) he referred to his body only seeing the soul is not mortal anyway.
    Our sages (in Sifra nedavah 1,1), comment as follows on the words נפש כי תחטא, “the expression נפש is meant to include converts and slaves of the Jews.”
    We have another Midrash (Tanchuma Vayikra 6) according to which the emphasis of the verse is on the words בשגגה, inadvertently. The Torah refers to what Solomon spoke about in Proverbs 19,2 “it is also not good for a person (נפש) to lack knowledge, he who rushes in with his feet sins.” This verse applies to two individuals, Achav ben Kulliah and Tzidkiyah ben Massiayh who were junior prophets (disciples of a school of prophets) at the time of the last King of Yehudah Tzidkiyah in Jerusalem, and who, according to tradition committed sins in Jerusalem and even after having been exiled continued sinning in Babylon. Their sin consisted in abusing their supposed prophetic powers to gain access to married women having in mind immoral  and illegitimate relations with these women. They would obtain these women’s husbands permission to be alone with their wives by claiming that they had a message for them from G’d which was only for their ears. Once they had gained access to these women they told them that G’d wanted them to become the mothers of future prophets. They would therefore suggest that the woman in question have intercourse with their respective friend and partner in crime so that the lady would become pregnant. Seeing that they did not demand sexual satisfaction for themselves but for another their story sounded more plausible and they were not suspected of being corrupt. They made this kind of deceit their regular mode of operation. Although they were such exceedingly wicked men they established for themselves a reputation of being great prophets in Babylon. Seeing that they had such a reputation pregnant women would ask them if they were going to give birth to a male child or to a female child. They would tell the pregnant woman that she would have son, but at the same time tell her girlfriend that the woman in question would have a daughter. When the woman who had been told she would have a son found that she gave birth to a daughter, her girlfriend would tell her that she knew this all along as the prophet had told her in confidence. The reason he had not told this to the pregnant woman was in order to save her the distress over expecting a daughter and having to endure pregnancy with such a prospect all the time. Eventually, one of them approached the wife of King Nebuchadnezzar in a similar fashion, asking that she sleep with his friend if she wanted to become the mother of a prophet. The lady said that she would not agree unless her husband had agreed to this first. She told the King about what Tzidkiyah had proposed to her, i.e. that she sleep with Achav. The King  called in both Achav and Tzidkiyah repeating what his wife told him, but adding that he was aware that the G’d of the Jews hated all manner of sexual licentiousness. He quoted the example of Zimri ben Salu who had been slain by Pinchas on account of sleeping with the princess of Midian, and how prior to Pinchas’ deed 24,000 Israelites had died by the plague because they committed the sin of sexual licentiousness. He challenged them to prove that they were not false prophets. He told them that once before he had wanted to know if Chananyah, Mishael and Azzaryah had been true prophets of the G’d in heaven and in order to know he heated a kiln for seven days, threw them into it bound hands and feet and they walked out unharmed. The King proposed that when examining Tzidkiyah and Achav he would heat up the same  kiln for only one day. If G’d would save them he would recognise them as true prophets and would agree that his wife become pregnant by one of them. Thereupon these two fakers said that seeing Chananyah, Mishael and Azzaryah were three it was understandable that G’d extended Himself in order to save them. Seeing there were only the two of them, it was unlikely that G’d would perform a miracle on their account. Nebuchadnezzar countered that there was indeed a third man, a Jew who  used to be the High Priest in Jerusalem. He, Nebuchadnezzar, would throw all three of them into the heated kiln and they would find out the result. The two false prophets were now encouraged by this, thinking that G’d would save them as He would not allow the High Priest to die such a death. They therefore agreed to the test. Nebuchadnezzar threw all three of them into the kiln; the two false prophets were burned whereas the High Priest Yehoshua was saved. This is the reason that Zecharyah 3,2 described this High Priest as “a brand who had been saved from the fire.”
    The incidence of these two false prophets Achav and Tzidkiyah became so widely known during the exile of the Jews in Babylon that when people had occasion to curse someone they would curse them by saying: “may G’d treat you as the King of Babylon treated Achav and Tzidkiyah whom he consigned to the flames (Jeremiah 29,22).” When trying to determine what was the downfall of these two men, we are reminded of their eagerness to run and commit sins (Proverbs 19,2), something far worse than being unable to resist temptation when it comes one’s way.
    
    4,3. אם הכהן המשיח יחטא, “if the High Priest becomes guilty of a sin, etc.” The list of sinners mentioned in this chapter proceeds in the following order: 1) High Priest, 2) High Court (collectively); 3) King; 4) the common people. The reason the Torah commences with the High Priest is that he is an outstanding individual  (Joshua 14,15) comparable to an angel of the Lord (Maleachi 2,7). When the people observe that even the High Priest has to bring a sin-offering they will be careful to return to G’d in repentance themselves. They will be encouraged when they see the High Priest bringing such an offering, reasoning that if G’d is willing to forgive the trespass of even such an highly placed individual as the High Priest, He would most certainly be willing to forgive ordinary people for their trespasses against Him. It was a well known fact that G’d relates more severely to people of distinction who become guilty of a sin than He does to ordinary individuals. This is why Solomon said in Kohelet 1,18 that “the amount of (G’d’s) anger is determined by the degree of wisdom (of the sinner).” The more wisdom one possesses the less forgivable is one’s sin. The best example in Scripture of the truth of this statement is Moses who was punished grievously for committing an error when striking the rock instead of speaking to it (Numbers 20,12).
   לאשמת העם, “due to the guilt of the people;” according to the custom of the people and their path, i.e. they are guilty. The Torah adds these words to teach that the High Priest should not be ashamed to confess and rectify his guilt when it was due to his falling into the bad habits practiced by the people. This is also the meaning of the words על אחת מכל אשר יעשה האדם לחטא בהנה, i.e. “one of the ways in which people are in the habit of sinning.” The expression אשם refers to habitual, knowing sin, whereas the expression יחטא which the Torah uses in connection with the sin of the High Priest refers to unintentional sin, something committed as an exception. The Torah teaches that the High Priest is to offer his offering and his mistake will be forgiven him just as G’d forgives the sins of the common people.
    Our sages in Midrash Eycha 3,34, comment on Lamentations 3,42: “we have sinned (knowingly) and we have rebelled, You have not forgiven.” The meaning is not that G’d did not forgive but that though if He had applied our own yardsticks He would not have forgiven, the fact is He applied His own yardstick and hence He did forgive. G’d’s yardsticks (attributes) enable Him to extend forgiveness even to habitual sinners completely,--provided the sinner returns to Him in sincere and total repentance. Isaiah 55,7 confirms this when he writes: “let the wicked give up his ways, the sinful man his plans; let him turn back to the Lord, and He will pardon him.” The word רשע, “the wicked man,” used in that verse refers to the sinner who boasts of his sins, who is a complete heretic denying that there is a G’d in heaven and that therefore there is no divine supervision of what occurs on earth. The word רשע is used in this context by Psalms 10,4: “the wicked, arrogant as he is in all his scheming (thinks) ‘He does not call to account; G’d does not care.’” There is no need to emphasise that the attribute of Mercy will forgive such a sinner as even the attribute of Justice forgives a repentant sinner. This is the meaning of Isaiah 55,7 וישוב אל ה' ורחמהו ואל אלו-הינו כי ירבה לסלוח, ”let him turn back to the Lord and He will pardon him, and to our G’d, for He freely forgives.” We find the same idea expressed in Psalms 36,2 and 36,6: “I know what Transgression says to the wicked; he has no sense of the dread of the Lord.” “O Lord Your faithfulness reaches to heaven; Your steadfastness to the sky.” This entire hymn is based on the deeds of the wicked, the heretics. This is the reason David speaks of the attribute of חסד, of loving kindness, (verse 6) as this attribute is known by the nations through G’d’s extending forgiveness to those who appear to have no claim to such treatment. The reason the psalmist adds the letter ה at the beginning of the word בהשמים instead of the customary בשמים is that this letter is like an entrance, a gateway. David hints that the gateway to forgiveness is open. Seeing that this attribute is located in heaven, it is important to show that the gateway to heaven remains open. The shape of the latter ה, i.e. a shape in our terrestrial world; it is meant to show that even in our terrestrial world a door is open to heaven. G’d does not deny His love to those who want to return to Him in penitence.
    
    4,13. ואם כל עדת ישראל ישגו, “and if the entire assembly of Israel err, etc.” The “assembly” referred to in our verse is the Sanhedrin, the Supreme Court. It could not be otherwise, as it is quite impossible for the entire Jewish nation by themselves to commit the same sin by mistake. In order to make this point quite clear the Torah added the words ונעלם הדבר מעיני העדה, “and the matter became obscured from the eyes of the congregation.” The Supreme Court, prophets, and Torah scholars are traditionally regarded as “the eyes of the congregation.” An example of this is found in Isaiah 29,10: “and has shut your eyes, the prophets, and covered your heads, the seers.” Isaiah makes it plain that the prophets are the eyes of the people. We also have a statement by our sages (Sifra, Vayikra 4,2) to that effect where we are told: “I might have supposed that here we are talking about the entire community; to ensure we do not misunderstand the Torah wrote the words עדה, whereas in Numbers 35,24 the Torah also used the word עדה, when describing judgment being pronounced on a murderer; just as there the word עדה refers to a court and not to the whole people, so here too the Supreme Court is meant and not the whole people.” Just as in that instance a court comprising not less than 23 judges is meant, so here too a court of not fewer than 23 judges is meant. What then is the precise meaning of the words כל עדת ישראל? It means a congregation peculiar to the Jewish people, i.e. the great Sanhedrin which had its seat on the Temple Mount.
    
    4,14. והקריבו הקהל פר בן בקר לחטאת והביאו אותו לפני אהל מועד, “and the congregation is to bring a two year old bull as a sin-offering, and they shall bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.” The sin of original man, Adam, and that of the Jewish people in the desert had something in common; this is the reason that our sages were of the opinion that Adam offered a bull as his sin-offering. (Chulin 60). This is also the reason that our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 5,6 made a point of commenting that this is the reason it is the only sin-offering of which the Torah writes that it was to be brought at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting (verse 4). The matter may be understood by means of a parable. A king had a friend who had brought him a valuable gift. The king was so impressed that he told his friend to display it at the entrance to his palace for all to see what a valuable gift he had presented to his ruler.
    The author’s own teacher, Rabbi Shlomoh ben Aderet, explained that the beautiful gift referred to in the parable was the repentance (not the bull). When a person has followed the instincts of his heart and thereby committed a sin, there is no nicer gift he can make to His Creator than to present the very item with which he sinned as a gift to his Creator. This proves that his repentance is unreserved. When the Torah repeats the expression: “in front of the Tent of Meeting” no fewer than three times in connection with this sin-offering of the bull, i.e. “he will bring it,” “he will slaughter it,” “he will sprinkle its blood seven times”, this underlines the point. [The people’s sin, of course, was that of the golden calf, and atoning for it by offering a bull makes the parable fit. Ed.] Thus far רשב'א. (The author elaborated on this in his commentary on Genesis 3,6 ויאכל).
    
    4,17. והזה שבע פעמים לפני ה' את פני הפרוכת, “he is to sprinkle (the blood) seven times before the Lord, before the curtain.” When describing a similar procedure performed with the sin-offering of the High Priest, the Torah wrote את פני פרוכת הקודש. What is the difference? We may again use a parable to illustrate the difference. When a king faces the rebellion of a small number of his subjects, his regime and his ministers will endure. If all his subjects rebel his regime will topple. As long as only the High Priest was guilty of a sin, the matter is not serious enough for the inner Sanctum, i.e. Dividing Curtain and what is beyond to lose its “holiness,” i.e. symbol of the kingdom. When the whole people rebelled, i.e. the entire Jewish nation was guilty of a sin of disloyalty, the “Dividing Curtain” could no longer be described as “holy”; its whole function had been undermined. By omitting mention of the adjective “holy” when speaking about the Dividing Curtain the Torah alluded to this difference.
    
    4,21. חטאת הקהל הוא, “it is a sin-offering by the congre-gation.” The word הוא [masculine, instead of the word היא which we would have expected as the appropriate pronoun applicable to the feminine חטאת, Ed.] refers to the word הפר, “the bull,” earlier in our verse.
    It is possible to view the word as an allusion to the sin of the golden calf (a male calf) which had been the only such collective sin of all the Jewish people in the desert. Our sages in Shemot Rabbah 42,5 state that because of this sin one of the feet of the merkavah, the carriers of G’d’s entourage, slipped at that time. They base this on Ezekiel 1,10 “and the face of the ox on the left of the four of them.” [in other words the “ox” symbolised the fact that through their sin at the golden calf the Israelites had undermined G’d’s throne, in particular the חיה with the face of an ox. Ed.] 
    The type of sin-offerings to be brought by either the High Priest or the people [when they followed faulty High Court instructions] were the same, i.e. a two year old bull, because Aaron the High Priest had committed the error first [when making the golden calf, Ed.] and the people’s sin was a consequence of Aaron making the calf. The Torah ascribes the calf to the people when writing (Exodus 32,20) “the calf they had made.” A few verses later (verse 35) as if correcting itself, the Torah writes: “which Aaron had made.” In other words, the Torah is trying to explain the sin of the people as due to Aaron having committed the first error.
    You should also appreciate why, when the Torah describes the sin-offering of the High Priest in verse 3, the bull is described as תמים לה', “unblemished for the Lord,” whereas here the Torah only mentions “the congregation shall offer a two year old bull as a sin-offering,” without mentioning anything about it being unblemished. All of this is evidence that the Torah wishes to preserve the impression that Aaron’s part in the entire golden calf episode had been of pure, unblemished intention. When he had invited the people to celebrate a festival for the Lord on  the morrow of the golden calf having emerged (32,5), he could not have known that some of the people had impure idolatrous intentions at that time and would treat this calf as a deity, as we know from Exodus 32,8: “they prostrated themselves before it and sacrificed to it.”
    
    4,22. אשר נשיא יחטא, “when a prince (king) will sin inadvertently,” The word אשר in this instance is the same as if the Torah had written אם, “if a prince has sinned, etc.” We find the word אשר substituting for the word אם also In Deut. 11,27 את הברכה אשר תשמעו, “the blessing, if you will listen, etc.”  Alternatively, we could understand the word to reflect a definitive statement, i.e. the Torah assuming that at one point or another a king is going to commit a sin and will have to offer a sin-offering. This then would account for the fact that the Torah did not choose to write אם נשיא יחטא, “if a king will sin, etc.” Seeing that the Torah had written אם הכהן המשיח יחטא, “if the High Priest will sin,” and it had written ואם כל עדת ישראל ישגו, “and if the entire congregation of Israel err, etc.,” the reason could be that seeing the High Priest is so careful not to sin, and the entire High Court cannot be presumed to err, the Torah did not want to write the word אשר in those instances which would have made a flat statement that these representatives of the people who are imbued with Holy Spirit would commit inadvertent sins. A king, who is no religious authority and to whom neither the people’s purity nor their piety is directly entrusted, is much more likely to err and sin; therefore the Torah used the expression אשר, to indicate that the Torah considers the fact that a king will sin at one time or another as a given. Kings have a hard time combating their arrogance and it is therefore not unusual for them to become guilty of sins. Keeping the pressures on kings to combat their egos in mind, the Torah devoted several verses to this in Deut. 17,20 and legislated certain restrictions on them to restrain their feeling all-powerful and above the law.
    It was not accidental that the princes- the nearest thing to kings the Israelites had in those days- donated the precious stones for the shoulder piece and breastplate of the High Priest as they were to atone for the sin of arrogance. Compare what we wrote on Exodus 35,27.
    A Midrashic approach (Sifra Vayikra 5,1) to the words אשר נשיא יחטא: According to Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai the word אשר may be understood as אשרי, i.e. “hail to the generation whose king offers a sin-offering for having committed an inadvertent sin. If he is humble enough to acknowledge an error and to seek forgiveness, how much more so is he likely to repent and ask forgiveness for sins committed knowingly!” If the people observe that their king acknowledges errors by offering a sin-offering how much more so will their subjects be encouraged to acknowledge their mistakes and bring sin-offerings and ask G’d’s forgiveness!
    I might have thought that when the Torah writes the word נשיא it refers to a mere tribal head such as Nachshon prince of Yehudah. In order to make clear that this is not the kind of נשיא the Torah has in mind here, we find the words ועשה אחת מכל מצות ה' אלו-היו אשר לא תעשינה, “and he becomes guilty of committing one of the acts from all the commandments of Hashem which may not be done, etc.” In Deut. 17,19 the Torah writes: ”in order that he (the king) should learn to fear the Lord his G’d.” The message is that just as the king who has no human authority above him must respect divine authority, so here too, the “prince” is to understand that he must respect divine authority. The word נשיא as describing the highest temporal authority is also used in Ezekiel 12,12 where the prophet writes: והנשיא אשר בתוכם  אל כתף ישא, which means that “that the king (Tzidkiyahu) should carry the vessels of exile on his shoulders.” The term נשיא is appropriate for a king as he is the most elevated person in the nation. This is also what the Torah meant in Exodus 22,27 where we read אלוהים לא תקלל ונשיא בעמך לא תאור, “you shall not curse G’d, nor shall you revile the leader of your people.” In that verse the Torah first warns against cursing the most high Being, i.e. G’d, followed by the most highly placed human being, i.e. the king who rules the land (or on earth). Our sages have said that when the people sin it is usually found that their king is punished for their sin. They base this on verse 21 in our chapter where the sin is described as חטאת העם, “the sin of the people,” and these words are followed immediately by the words “when a ruler sins.” They use this sequence to teach that anyone in authority who is able to protest wrongdoing and does not do so is considered as guilty of the wrongdoing committed (Shabbat 54).
    
    4,23. או הודע אליו, “or (the sin) becomes known to him, etc.” The meaning of the words is the same as if the Torah had written either והודע or וידע חטאתו, “he is aware of his sin.” In other words, the word או here is to be understood as the same as the connecting letter ו, “and.” We find a similar construction in Proverbs 30,31 זרזיר מתנים או תיש, where the words do not mean “a greyhound or a male goat,” but “a greyhound as well as a male goat.” [This is the view of commentators such as Rabbi Yonah quoted by Kimchi רד'ק)).] This leaves us with the need to explain why the Torah chose this way of writing the word הודע with the letter ה in front as well as the additional word או. The reason may be that the sin-offering is related to the last letter ה in the tetragram. This is also why the Torah speaks of שעירת עזים תמימה נקבה in verse 28 where the reference to the subject which is masculine, i.e. קרבנו, should have rated the expression תמים instead of תמימה with the feminine ending at the end. The fact is that the letter ה really does refer to the word קרבנו and the message is that G’d inflicts afflictions on the sinner in order to prompt him to repent and to offer the sacrifice as proof of his repentance. It is the attribute of Justice represented by that last letter ה in the tetragram which initiates the afflictions setting the process of repentance-sin-offering in motion. The verse means that had the sinner not been victimised by such afflictions he would not have become aware of his sin.
    
    5,1. נפש כי תחטא ושמעה קול אלה, “If a person will sin, having heard  a sound (demand) for an oath, etc.” Tanchuma Vayikra 7, commenting on this introduction writes as follows: “take note that when both the creatures in the celestial regions and the ones in the terrestrial regions were created their creation was the result of G’d employing only one half of His name, i.e. Isaiah 26,4 כי ביה ה' צור עולמים, ‘that the Lord employed only the letters י-ה of His name when creating the universe.’ He did so in order that the sinners should not become guilty of desecrating His entire name when sinning.” Observe the sequence of the wording of the Torah in our verse. Instead of the Torah writing אדם כי יקריב מכם לה’ קרבן, the Torah writes אדם כי יקריב מכם קרבן לה'. The reason that the name “for the Lord” appears only at the end is to prevent the possibility of someone dying after having uttered the words “for the Lord” without his being able to complete the sentence. This is how careful one has to be not to utter the name of the Lord in vain. This attitude is reflected in Solomon writing in Kohelet 5,1 “be not rash with your mouth, and let not your heart be hasty to utter a word before G’d.”
    Our sages (Tanchuma Vayikra 7) said that Jews should not be rash with offering vows and they should not make a practice of uttering oaths (even true ones). .hey tell of a king called Har in whose time 2,000 towns were destroyed all because of a true oath, because the oath was not called for. What was the oath all about? A person (not just one) swore an oath to his friend that he would go to a certain place and eat and drink there. He completed the journey and kept his oath. All the towns in which they confirmed all their intentions by phrasing them as an oath were ruined. If this is what happened to towns whose inhabitants honoured their oaths, how much worse is in store for people who do not honour their oaths! When in the future, G’d will judge people, the ones who will be accused for swearing a false oath will be put in the same company as the witches, sorcerers, and adulterers. This is all based on Maleachi 3,5: “But I will step forward to contend against you and I will act as a relentless accuser against those who have no fear of Me; who practice sorcery, commit adultery, who swear falsely, who cheat labourers of their hire and who subvert the cause of the widow.” G’d said: “the mouth which I gave you was meant to be used to sing My praises. Instead you use it to defame Me.” This is what is meant by Solomon in Proverbs 16,4: “the Lord made everything for a purpose, for His sake.” Another verse commenting on this subject is found in Isaiah 57,20: “but the wicked are like the troubled sea which cannot rest, whose waters toss up mire and mud.” Just as the waves of the sea in their arrogance rise higher and higher only to collapse upon themselves and be broken as soon as they hit the sand along the shore and the wave following it does not learn a lesson from the fate of the preceding wave, so the wicked do not learn from the fate which has befallen other wicked people before by becoming penitents. This is why they are compared to the waves of the sea which do not know the meaning of ever coming to rest in the world. The righteous, on the other hand, do know the meaning of calm and quiet as testified by Jeremiah 30,10 who writes: “and Yaakov shall again have calm and quiet with none to trouble him.”
   והוא עד או ראה או ידע, “and he was a witness who either saw or knew, etc.” According to Nachmanides we are not dealing with three separate subjects here. There cannot be someone who is a witness unless he has seen and knows. The meaning of the verse is that if the witness in question has been appealed to by an injured party to come forward and to testify to what he has seen and what he knows of, he will bear guilt if he fails to come forward.
    In fact, if one speaks of money which is under dispute it is impossible to be a witness unless one has seen and has knowledge of what has been agreed upon. However, it is possible to understand the verse in such a way that it does speak of three separate situations. Each of the situations would be a testimony all by itself. There is such a thing as having witnessed something with one’s eyes without one understanding the meaning of what one has seen. Similarly, it is possible to have knowledge of something even if one has not seen it with one’s eyes. There can even be testimony involving neither seeing nor having knowledge. Let me illustrate: If someone observed Reuven handing over money to Shimon  but he did not know whether this money was a loan, a repayment of a loan, or a deposit for safe-keeping, or even if the recipient was a messenger taking possession of the money on behalf of the person who had asked him to do so; in all these cases merely seeing something is not sufficient basis for relevant testimony. The reverse, i.e. knowledge of something without having witnessed the truth of the statement with one’s eyes could be that Reuven heard Shimon admit that he had borrowed money from him. Since at the time he admitted it he did not make repayment, Reuven is in no position to testify to a transaction. The testimony of such a witness may still be of benefit to the plaintiff  even when there is neither knowledge of a transaction or the transaction having been witnessed in cases where the person called upon to testify knows the signature of the party or parties concerned and can affirm or deny them. His testimony may help the plaintiff recover his money on the basis of the debtor’s signature to a document being independently confirmed. You could therefore justify the meaning of the word או as meaning “or” in the words והוא עד או ראה או ידע “and he is (either) a witness, or saw, or knew, etc.”
    On the words: אם לוא יגיד ונשא עונו, “if he fails to testify he shall bear his iniquity,” our sages (Sifra Vayikra 11,5) comment that the meaning is that he fails to testify in a place where he is duty-bound to testify, i.e. at court. If such a witness withholds his testimony in private conversation with either of the litigant parties he is not guilty of anything. The Torah’s warning applies to him only if he fails to testify in a legitimate court. A Biblical example is Achan who was not obligated to reveal his misdemeanour before Joshua took him to court. This is why Joshua pleaded with him: (Joshua 7,19) “please tell me what you have done (i.e. confess).” Seeing that there have to be at least 2 litigants, one witness, and three members of the court, the letter ו in the word והגד, in that verse was added to allude to the 6 people involved. In our verse too the word לוא instead of being spelled לא as is customary, had the letter ו added in order to make the same point. It suggests that “if not,” the party concerned will be guilty of the penalty implied in the words ונשא עונו, “he will bear his guilt.” The allusion is that he is guilty only if he fails to testify in the presence of the 6 people represented by that letter ו.
    One may also see in the words והוא עד, “and he is a witness,” that the meaning of the whole verse is that if he withholds his testimony by not testifying before a court thinking that he can get away with it seeing no one will ever know that he suppressed evidence so how could he be convicted of something? The letters in the words והוא עד refer to G’d being a witness to suppressed evidence even if there is no such evidence in a human court. This would not be the first time that the word הוא  is used to describe G’d. One such appearance is in Isaiah 42,8 אני ה' הוא שמי, or Psalms 100,3 הוא עשנו ולו אנחנו, “He has made us and we belong to Him.” A third example is Psalms 19,6 והוא כחתן יוצא מחופתו, “and He (G’d) is like a bridegroom emerging from His wedding canopy.” Still another example of the word הוא meaning “G’d” is Numbers 18,23 ועבד הלוי הוא, “and the Levite will serve G’d.” There are many other examples to confirm what we have said. It is therefore appropriate to translate the words והוא עד in our verse as “and He (G’d) is a witness.” He examines all of man’s motivations, thoughts, etc., and administers punishment based on what He discovers.
    There is yet another possibility that the additional letter ו in the word לוא is an allusion to the six days of creation and that it is meant to teach us that he who suppresses testimony on behalf of his friend is considered as if he suppressed testifying to the fact that G’d had initiated the universe all by Himself in the space of six days. When a person becomes guilty of committing relatively minor sins he will eventually commit major sins such as heresy.
    
    5,5. והתודה אשר חטא עליה, “he will confess that wherein he has sinned.” We speak about someone who was in doubt if he had committed an error and upon closer examination finds that he has indeed committed that sin inadvertently. This is indicated by the choice of the word והתודה, “that he makes himself confess, attains certainty.”
    Our sages (Sifri Nasso 2) say that the word teaches that every sin requires that it be confessed. The same explanation occurs elsewhere in the Sifri on Numbers 5,6 “this person has committed a sin etc.,” where the operative word is the repetition of the word נפש, meaning that by the sin he has forfeited his life. That verse is used as the classic verse demanding that every sinner is required to confess his sin in order that his guilt can be expiated.  [Even sinners who are executed for their sins do not obtain atonement if they did not confess their guilt prior to execution. Achan, who was mentioned earlier, is a case in point. Ed.] 
    
    5,6. והביא את אשמו לה' על חטאתו אשר חטא, נקבה מן הצאן, “he shall bring as his guilt-offering to Hashem a female from the flock, etc.” Our sages called this paragraph the עולה ויורד, meaning that although the expression אשמו occurs here the nature of the offering is not the kind of offering called אשם elsewhere at all. The offering known by the name אשם is invariably a male animal and here the Torah speaks of a female animal being the guilt-offering. Why then do we encounter the word אשמו usually translated as “his guilt-offering?” The reason is that his sin or guilt is the cause of his having to bring an offering. Just as on occasion a verse in Scripture refers to חכמה, “wisdom” as לב, “heart,” seeing that the heart is the seat or cause of wisdom, so here the Torah refers to the cause for the offering and calls it by that name.
    The term עולה ויורד, “ascending or descending,” given by the sages to the category of guilt-offerings discussed now is that the value of the offering is adjusted to the economic circumstances of the person who has to offer this sacrifice. If a person was wealthy at the time he committed the sin but became impoverished by the time he could bring his sacrifice, the Torah bases the sacrifice on his most recent economic circumstances. The same is true in reverse. Even though at the time he committed the offense he was poor and would have qualified for a less expensive offering to make expiation, if in the interval he became wealthy, inherited money for instance, he must bring a sacrifice commensurate with his present economic status. The Torah distinguishes between the rich, the poor, and the destitute. The former has to bring a sheep or goat, the person who is poor brings either two pigeons or two turtle-doves. The destitute brings a meal-offering consisting of a tenth of an epho of fine flour and oil. The Torah is explicit concerning the value of a guilt-offering consisting of a ram, writing that its valuation is 2 “holy shekalim,” i.e. four times the half shekel every male over 20 years of age had to “donate” for the Tabernacle for expiation of his participation in the sin of the golden calf as stipulated in Exodus 30,12. The author explains what the value of these two shekalim was in Arabic currency in his time, something not very relevant to us. [approx. 28 grams or 1 ounce of pure silver in our weights. Ed.] It was presumed that the two birds which the poor had to bring was worth about one tenth of that, whereas the value of the meal-offering by the destitute was worth one tenth of the two birds, i.e. 1% of the value of the “wealthy” sinner. You find an allusion to this in the missing letter י in the word עשרית האפה instead of the normal עשירית האפה when the Torah discusses this measure. 
    
    5,10. וכפר עליו הכהן....ונסלח לו, “and the Priest will provide him atonement....and it shall be forgiven him.” Forgiveness will originate in heaven as the guilt will disappear together with the burning up of the sacrifice. The meaning of וכפר as making atonement occurs for the first time when Yaakov brought gifts (similar to sacrifices) to his brother Esau hoping that he would forgive him (ואכפרה פניו) for obtaining the birthright by trickery (Genesis 32,21). There is a difference between what is described as כפרה “atonement,” and סליחה, “forgiveness.” The latter means that the guilt has been totally forgiven, is now “non-existent” whereas the former is merely concerned with culpability for the sin committed. It is not within the capacity of human beings to grant forgiveness; only G’d Himself can wipe the slate clean completely. This is why David writes in Psalms 130,4: “forgiveness rests with You.” The High Priest, while initiating the process of forgiveness, cannot complete it, only G’d can. When someone was guilty of שבועת בטוי, (verse 4) “a false oath,” there is atonement only. The Torah does not add the words that “it will be forgiven him.” [swearing a false oath is hardly an unintentional sin qualifying for total forgiveness. Ed.]
    
    5,15. נפש כי תמעל מעל וחטאה בשגגה מקדשי ה', ”if a person commits treachery and sins unintentionally against Hashem’s holies;” in this instance the Torah prefaces the expression מעל, “commits a trespass,” before mentioning the word חטא, “sin.” On the other hand, in the paragraph dealing with someone denying that he had received an object in trust for safe-keeping, etc., (verse 21) the order of describing the sin is reversed, i.e. first we have the word תחטא before the word מעלה. Another difference between both instances involving מעילה and unintentional sins not being described as “trespass” is the requirement to repay punitive damages, i.e. “one fifth.” The reason for all this is that here the Torah does not speak of unintentionally committed sins. There clearly was an intent to defraud either the Temple treasury or a fellow human being. Proof that the word מעילה implies deliberate wrong-doing is found in Ezra 9,2 where the subject is the mixed marriages of Jews to Gentiles. The author stigmatises the leaders of the people for setting a poor example to the rest of the population by being the first ones to indulge in this sinful practice, calling it מעל. [one does not engage in the wholesale practice of marrying unconverted Gentiles through an error. Ed.]
    When the Torah uses the word חטא, however, this describes a sin committed erroneously, inadvertently. We have proof that this is the meaning of the word from Judges 20,16 ולא יחטיא, “and he would not miss (fail to hit his target).” A miss certainly would have been unintentional.
    When the Torah deals with trespass against holy, sacred property, where no human being suffers from the intent to defraud, the Torah mentions the nature of the sin, “trespass” first. Seeing G’d did not “suffer,” He is able to treat the sin as if it had been committed unintentionally. The verse may be translated as “a person commits a trespass sinning unintentionally, etc.” In verse 21 however, where the sinner defrauds a fellow human being the Torah emphasises the sinful nature of the act by mentioning the word תחטא before defining the sin, i.e. “a trespass.” The noun מעל implies the sinful, deliberate nature of the act. [the author feels that the last word is the word which carries the emphasis in both instances, the first word being like an adjective though it describes the action. Ed.]  It is typical of the Torah to treat sins committed against one’s fellow human being as more difficult to atone for than sins committed against G’d directly.
    It I also an important rule in the Hebrew language, or at  least in Biblical Hebrew, that when the order of certain words is inverted there is an important message in such apparently arbitrary use of the sequence of these words. Let us consider the example of תפשום חיים or חיים תפשום, which we translate in English as “capture them alive” (compare Kings I 20,18 where both expressions are used in the same verse, and it appears at first glance as if there were no difference between the two instructions of Ben Haddad). Seeing that Ben Haddad commanded that the men in question be captured alive regardless of whether their intention had been peaceful or hostile, why did he change the wording, using the expression “capture them alive” in the event that they were peaceful, and the expression “alive you shall capture them” in the event that the men’s intentions were hostile?  The meaning of the words תפשום חיים “capture them alive”  is “do not only not kill them when attempting to capture them, but let them continue to live.” In the second command the emphasis on the word חיים first means that you are to “capture their lives,” i.e. to kill them.
    Let us illustrate what is meant by G’d reacting more sternly to wrongs committed between people than to wrongs committed by His creatures against Himself. In Genesis 12,3 G’d states that “he who curses you (Avraham) I will curse,” i.e. G’d personally will avenge Avraham’s injured dignity. By way of contrast we read in Samuel I 2,30 that “those who honour Me I will honour whereas those who spurn Me shall be dishonoured.” G’d did not say that He, personally, will dishonour the people who spurn Him, whereas He, personally, will honour people who show Him respect. In connection with Jerobam, King of Israel, who had dared offer a sacrifice to an idol on the altar he had built illegally, we find that G’d punished him immediately, making his arm lame, because he had given orders to arrest the prophet who had spoken out against the altar. G’d had failed to take visible revenge on Jerobam who had built the altar and sacrificed to idols upon it. Again we have proof of how concerned G’d is with the dignity of his creatures, in this instance “the man of G’d.” [even the ones who spurn Him. Ed.] In Kings II 6,18 where the subject is war between Aram and  Israel during the days of Elisha we find that while G’d never struck the soldiers of Ben Haddad’s army with blindness although they had been worshipping idols all their lives, when Elisha asked G’d to strike them with blindness G’d obliged so that they could not capture him. Here too you see that G’d’s concern for His creature, Elisha, was greater than His concern with insults the same people had heaped upon Him.
    Concerning the payment of a penalty of 20% (25% respectively) for having violated another person’s trust, the Torah writes in verse 24 of our chapter וחמישתיו יסף עליו. We need to understand the sequence of the paragraph as follows: after the person to whom a deposit had been entrusted denies that he either received it or had not yet returned it, he aggravates his sin by swearing an oath that what he said was true, he ought by rights to pay many such extra 20% penalties. This explains the plural form of the word חמישתיו instead of חמישתו which we would have expected. The extra penalty would be imposed for the original refusal to pay a single extra 20%. Actually, in practice, the Torah does not impose the multiple penalty payments; however the Torah wants to be on record that strict Justice would have demanded that the guilty party now pay several times what he had to pay before he swore a false oath. [Here too we see that in practice G’d waived the penalty for the insult addressed to Him by means of a false oath, whereas the original denial vis-a-vis the wronged party did carry such a penalty. Ed].
    Sifra Vayikra 21,3 commenting on the words ונפש כי מעלה מעל בה', where the word “against G’d” is peculiar seeing that the trespass was directed against a fellow human being, states in the name of Rabbi Akiva that all loans, etc., should have been executed with a document, witnessed, etc. The party who extended a loan without insisting on a written receipt is partly at fault for causing the borrower to be tempted to deny his liability seeing the lender could not offer proof of the borrower’s indebtedness to him. Seeing this happened, the borrower now has to have his denial of the debt witnessed by witnesses and a document. 
    The person who entrusted his belongings for safe-keeping to a third parry without witnesses did so precisely because he did not want a third party to know anything about the whereabouts of the object. This is why he is not criticised by the Torah as having trespassed against G’d in what he did and how he did it. The word בה' therefore alludes to the third party to the transaction described, i.e. G’d. Only He knows about it in addition to the two parties directly involved.
    
    5,17. ולא ידע ואשם ונשא עונו, “and he did not know and became guilty, he shall bear his guilt.” According to Rashi this paragraph deals with someone who may or may not have committed a sin for which he penalty is the karet penalty when it has been committed intentionally. The classic example given in the Talmud is a person who has both permissible and forbidden fat in front of him and has eaten some,   believing both kinds to be permissible. When he was told subsequently that one of the two pieces of fat in front of him had been חלב, i.e. fat the deliberate consumption of which  carries the karet penalty, he has to bring an offering known as אשם תלוי, a “guilt-offering that is pending;” [his culpability is “suspended” until he can be sure of what he did eat. Ed.]
    Another scenario described by our verse could be that of a  woman in a man’s bed of whose identity he was not certain, i.e. if she was his wife or his sister. He had slept with her not having made sure of her identity. Our sages  in Nazir 23 understand the words “he did not know and becomes guilty, carrying his guilt” as astounding. It is amazing that if a person who is faced with two distinct choices such as in the first example has to bring an אשם תלוי, is it not clear that if someone who did not even have two different entities in front of him is surely guilty of bringing at least such an offering?
    One may raise an objection to the entire line of reasoning involved here. In the earlier paragraph the party who has committed a sin in error has to bring a regular sin-offering  (compare 4,28), whereas here where the person is not even certain that he has committed a sin at all the Torah refers to his offering as אשם, which has a much stronger connotation of sin than the word חטאת, a term reserved for offerings atoning for inadvertent sin. Why should the Torah give the impression that the person who does not even know if he committed a sin is guilty of something more than the person who does know that he committed a sin, but in error? The very expression אשם is related to the word שממה, wasteland, something desolate, i.e. a very negative connotation. It is called thus to remind the sinner that he has become guilty of destroying his entitlement to life, so to speak. So why treat the possible sinner as worse than the definitive sinner?
    Furthermore, why is the offering of the person who is aware of having sinned the female she-goat, something we character-ised earlier as indicating less guilt than when one has to bring a male animal, whereas the person whose guilt has not even been established as yet has to bring a male animal, אשם, as if his sin were more severe than that of a person who knows definitively that he did commit such a sin? (the author adds that the ram has more blood than the she-goat, so that shedding more blood is symbolic of a greater sin). The answer to these questions is that once one knows that one has committed a sin the very knowledge weighs upon one and produces the guilt feelings desired by G’d. When a person is in doubt about having committed a sin altogether his conscience does not bother him so much as he tries to convince himself that he may not have committed a sin altogether. In order to bring home to the person who is not certain that he has indeed committed a sin, the Torah, by treating this “maybe sin” as if it were more serious than the definite sin, hopes to achieve the psychological effect it desires. Having achieved this result the “maybe sinner” may resort to confession of his laxity in not making certain that what he ate or whom he slept with was permissible beyond the shadow of a doubt. This is why the person described in verse 17 is called אשם as if he were someone guilty of a serious sin. This is also why the word אשם, אשום אשם appears three times in verse 19 of our chapter. The matter is comparable to what our sages explained in connection with the sin-offering on the new Moon in Numbers 28,15 where the male goat is described as לחטאת לה' as “a sin-offering for the Lord.” Seeing the Torah had not mentioned any specific sin this offering was to atone for, the sages (Shevuot 9) concluded that the meaning of the words are that only the Lord is aware of what possible sin this animal is to expiate for.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Sifra Vayikra 12,7-13):The author quotes Rabbi Yossi Haglili as saying concerning the words ולא ידע ואשם ונשא עונו, “here the Torah punishes a person who is unaware for his very being unaware.” From this we can only deduce that if people who were unaware of having committed a sin are held responsible for their lack of awareness, how much more so must people be guilty and face punishment when they have been aware of wrongdoing!
    Rabbi Yossi adds the following thought. If you want to get any idea of the degree of reward in store for the righteous, consider the case of Adam, first man. Adam had been commanded only a single negative commandment. When he violated the commandment untold number of deaths were decreed on mankind, i.e. his descendants for thousands of years. We have it on the authority of G’d Himself that when determining reward for commandments performed G’d employs a multiple of the ratio He demonstrated when He punished people for sins committed (compare Exodus 20,6). How much reward may be expected for people who abstain from violating negative commandments such as fasting on Yom Kippur, not eating sacrificial meat past the time limit allocated for it, etc., etc. Surely, by comparing what happened to the descendants of Adam because he violated a negative commandment, how much reward is in store for all the people not violating 365 commandments most of which they are capable of violating!” 
    Rabbi Akiva draws attention to the following: The Torah writes that for a matter to be considered as definitive two or three witnesses are required (Deut. 17,6). If two witnesses suffice  for a court to arrive at a valid judgment, why did the Torah bother to mention that three witnesses suffice? The reason the Torah mentions a third witness is to impose an additional responsibility on the third witness. Assuming three witnesses testified falsely that they had seen someone commit a crime at a certain location at a certain time, and it turns out that the testimony is refuted by other witnesses who testify that the first three were seen at a different location at the time in question, the third witness cannot claim exoneration by saying that his testimony never made any difference in the first place as only two witnesses had been required to establish guilt or innocence. In other words, we find that the Torah punishes anyone who even incidentally assists the sinners. If that is so, how much will G’d reward people who, while not actually performing certain commandments, enable others to do so by their actions?
    Rabbi Eleazar ben Azaryah points out that the Torah (Deut. 24,19) wrote: “When you reap your harvest in your field, and you forget a bundle in the field, you shall not turn back to take it....G’d will bless you in all your handiwork.” The Torah in this instance promises a blessing to people, who though unaware of it, were instrumental in a good deed being performed through their oversight (Sifra Vayikra 12,7).
    
    5,21. או בגזל או עשק את עמיתו, “or by robbery or by defrauding his fellow.” There is a difference between “robbery” and “defrauding.” This is why the Torah writes in Leviticus 19,13:  “You shall not defraud your fellow. You shall not commit robbery.” Each of these actions is considered violation of a separate law, commandment. A person may be guilty of robbery even when he admits that he has committed this deed as long as he has not made restitution. “Defrauding” implies that the guilty party denies his guilt by claiming to have already made restitution or having paid the rent, as the case may be. The Talmud (Baba Metzia 111) determines that “robbery” means someone admitting having someone else’s property in his possession and refusing to give it back, while “defrauding” means  that the accused party claims to have returned the object or money in question.
    
    5,23. והיה כי יחטא ואשם, “it will be when he has sinned and realises his guilt, etc.” The reason why the Torah repeats the words meaning “he has sinned,” using both the term יחטא and אשם is to bring home the point that in all these instances the sin is two-fold. The sinner committed a crime against his fellow man but he also sinned against G’d the Law giver. The sin discussed in this verse is an intentional one. This is why the paragraph commences with the words נפש כי תחטא instead of writing merely כי תחטא בשגגה, “if he sinned erroneously.” All the other instances in which the Torah has used the term חטא the word בשגגה, “inadvertently,” or words to that effect accompanied the term  חטא (compare 4,2; 4,22; 4,27; 5,15). It is a well known fact that most sin-offerings are brought only in respect of unintentionally committed sins. There are only four instances when a guilt-offering is prescribed for sins committed knowingly; they are: 1) if someone slept with a Gentile servant girl (slave); 2) a Nazirite who defiled himself; 3) swearing a false oath as part of one’s testimony. 4) swearing a false oath concerning matters entrusted to him (compare Keritut 9).
   והשיב את הגזלה אשר גזל, “he has to return the object which he had obtained through robbery;” It would have been sufficient for the Torah to write: “he shall give back the object obtained by robbery.” Why did the Torah add the words “which he has robbed?” The Torah taught that it is not sufficient to return the value of the object but that the actual object which has been obtained by robbery must be returned. (assuming it is still in existence and in its original condition). If, assuming we are speaking about coins, it had already become mixed with other coins so that it cannot be identified with certainty, the guilty party has to make restitution in kind (Baba Kama 66). The text of the Talmud, (omitting mentioning the divergent views expressed by some scholars) is: “if he stole (robbed) a beam and has used it in building an upper floor in his house and he now tears down the entire upper floor and restores the beam to the owner he has done more than the law requires of him.” [The school of Hillel  decreed this so that the guilty party would not be discouraged from making restitution.] 
    The type of repentance which the people of Nineveh (whom the prophet Jonah had threatened with destruction) performed was of that nature. We are told in Jonah 3,8  that the king of Nineveh issued orders to his countrymen that “they shall turn back from his evil ways and from the injustice of which he is guilty.”  Our sages in Baba Kama 11 commenting on the apparently redundant words אשר גזל, “which he obtained through robbery,” read the words as if they meant “which are similar to having been obtained through robbery.” They mean that assuming the original object has become worth less by the time the guilty party is willing to make restitution, he has to base the restitution on the value at the time he committed the crime. The same rule also applies in the case of deposits or wages withheld that someone is accused of and has first denied. The Torah also repeated the unnecessary words אשר עשק in order to make this point quite clear. 
    
    5,24. לאשר הוא לו יתננו, “he shall give it to its owner.” This means that the party who had first been guilty of denial has to give both principal and premium to the injured party. Restitution is not effected through the good offices of the court but directly by the guilty party to the injured party. It is also possible that the words לאשר הוא לו mean that the money is to be returned to the party entitled to it, i.e. the heirs of the person from whom it has been taken against his will, if that person had died in the interval.
   ביום אשמתו, “on the day he admits his guilt.” The day in question is the day that he realises his guilt. This day may even be the very day on which he committed the wrong. The Torah teaches us here that as long as the guilty party has not actually refunded the object in question he is considered as still as guilty as before. There are basically two categories of sin; 1) sin against the Creator not involving one’s fellow, i.e. acts of rebellion against G’d. 2) crimes committed against fellow human beings. The first category of sin originates in a person becoming estranged from his G’d by not realising that he is a constant recipient of G’d’s kindness. Such a sinner basically commits his “violence” against himself and his life. The matter is comparable to what Solomon wrote in Proverbs 6,32: “anyone who commits adultery with a woman (consenting adults) lacks understanding; he who wants to destroy himself does such a thing.” The sinner just described committed his sin “only” against one party, i.e. against G’d.
    The second category of sin is that committed vis-a-vis his fellow man. For instance, he may abuse his fellow man verbally, or he may even inflict bodily harm upon him. When doing this the guilty party also sins against G’d at the same time. This is why the crime of robbery is such a severe crime. Our sages (Vayikra Rabbah 33,3)  said that if a person is guilty of a whole measuring cup full of sins, the one which demands justice from G’d is only the crime of robbery. The decree to wipe out the generation of the deluge was issued on account of their being guilty of robbery, indiscriminate lack of respect for other people’s property The Torah spells this out unmistakably in Genesis 613, “the end of all flesh has come before Me...for the earth has become full of violence, robbery.”
    We also find that when the prophet Ezekiel listed a whole slew of sins committed by the Jewish people (Ezekiel 22,2-13)  that it was the sin of shedding (innocent) blood, i.e. violence which led to the city of Jerusalem’s destruction being sealed. The abuse of widow, orphan, and the poor are mentioned. The desecration of the Sabbath, spurning sacred offerings, committing the sin of slander, all serious sins, did not bring about the final decree of destruction, but robbery and murder did (compare verse 13 in that chapter).
    When G’d spoke about “pounding His hand” in Ezekiel 22,13  this occurred only after He had mentioned the sin of robbery, seeing that this is such a grievous sin. In the following verse G’d says: ”can your courage endure or your hand be strong in the days when I shall deal with you?” Although the commandment not to rob is the type of commandment which is linked to the positive commandment of making restitution, i.e. it can be atoned for relatively easily, the sin is very grievous as one cannot always locate the injured party when one is finally ready to make restitution and as a result the sin remains unatoned. Even if the victimised party is located but does not want to forgive the robber, he has no way of rehabilitating himself. Alternatively, the robber may have become a poor beggar and as such is simply unable to make amends. For all the above-mentioned reasons the sin of robbery is very serious although tied to the positive command- ment of making restitution.
    Material wealth has a way of disappearing as we know from Solomon  (Proverbs 23,5) “riches grow wings, fly away heaven- ward like an eagle.” Even a wealthy robber may not have much time to make restitution then. Another problem with robbery is that the robber may often not even know whom he has robbed, such as when he robbed money belonging to a group of people. How can he make restitution when he does not even know to whom he owes how much? Concerning this latter eventuality the Torah wrote: “he has to bring his guilt-offering to the Lord” (verse 25), so that after he has made restitution he can at least be clear vis-a-vis Hashem. Having made restitution he is then in a position to bring the guilt-offering as spelled out in verse 26, i.e. that the Priest will provide him with atonement.
     
    There cannot be effective repentance based on words and on an offering unless it has been preceded by action, i.e. restitution. This is what the prophet Isaiah 1,16 meant when he said: “wash yourselves clean, put your evil deeds away from My sight.” He also said (verse 17) “learn to do good!” Furthermore, it is written in verse 18 of the same chapter: “if your sins be as crimson they can turn snow-white.” Job’s friends (Job 11,14) said to him “if there is iniquity with you, remove it; do not let injustice reside in your tent.” In this verse they warned Job not to be guilty of the sin of robbery either in public or in private. The first half of the verse addresses the sin of robbery which is plain for all to see, the second half mentioning his tent, speaks of concealed acts of robbery. His friends ask Job to examine if he had been guilty of that sin (which could account for the afflictions he was suffering). His friends continue by promising him relief if he found he had been guilty of this sin and had taken steps to make restitution. This is the meaning of “life will be brighter than noon, etc.” (verse 17). They add: “you will be secure, for there is hope, and entrenched you will rest secure; you will lie down undisturbed.” His friends promise him that he will be secure both in public and in private. Even when you find yourself in difficulty you will not have cause to be afraid..
    David echoes similar sentiments when he says in Psalms 51,6:  “I have only sinned against You (G’d).” David implies that he is free of such sins against his fellow man as robbery or sins related to it. We find that David offered a similar prayer on another occasion (Psalms 19,13) “who can be aware of errors? Clear me of unperceived guilt.” David did not pray to be protected against sins he was aware of. He wanted relief only from sins committed unwittingly in circumstances where no one had seen him commit them and which he did not remember having committed. He implied that he had been careful not to become guilty of deliberate sins. It is a well known fact that he who is careful to avoid sinning will have his reward stored up by G’d; this is what Isaiah 40,10 referred to when he said: “see his reward is with Him, his recompense before Him.” The same sentiment is echoed by the words (Psalms 19,12) “Your servant pays them heed; in obeying them there is much reward.”
    
    
    
    
   צו  את  אהרן
    
    
   הוקר רגלך מבית רעך פן ישבעך ושנעך, “Visit your neighbour’s house sparingly, otherwise he will become fed up with you and hate you” (Proverbs 25,17). In this verse Solomon taught us both ethics and manners. On the one hand, a person should endeavour to acquire friends and strive to socialise with them. On occasion he should take his leave before he becomes a burden or intrusion to his friends. It appears that both here as well as elsewhere Solomon counsels us to exercise one’s discretion, to walk the middle path between seclusion and imposing one’s presence on one’s friends all the time.
    When friends and companions meet at a central location such meetings are apt to increase mutual friendship and comradeship. This is why Solomon writes in Proverbs 18,24: ”a man who has friends must himself be friendly, some friends cling to one another more than a brother.” Basically, what Solomon is saying is that if someone has the attribute of winning friends, this is proof that he is of a friendly disposition himself. The meaning of the word להתרועע in that verse is “to be praiseworthy.” The word is connected to בצלצלי תרועה, (Psalms 150,5) “cymbals” being two matching instruments. It is presumed that if one is seen to have friends, other people will search out the company of such a person. He is likely to possess two positive virtues: 1) humility, (seeing that people to not flock to keep company with the haughty, the arrogant but they flee the company of such people). 2) He is not shy of contact with other people. When one possesses these two positive attributes one is saved from two  major problems which are usually associated with both poverty and material wealth. The poor usually speak in a beseeching manner, whereas the rich usually respond in a harsh manner (Proverbs 18,23). A poor person has reason to be afraid of society, of people; he does not like to have to flatter people because he needs to rely on their goodwill. The damage which results from being materially wealthy is that one tends to brag about one’s wealth. When Solomon wrote the verse we just quoted he actually downgraded both the possession of too much wealth and the lack of sufficient economic means. Both are not character-building but tend to be character-destructive. This is not the only time Solomon has voiced such ideas. We find a similar verse in Proverbs 30,8: “give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with bread allotted to me.” He explains the reason for his request saying: “lest I become so sated that I renounce You and say: ‘who is the Lord?’ then I would become impoverished and steal and profane the name of the Lord.” We find similar sentiments expressed by a famous scholar who said: “excess of material wealth is just as damaging to a person as excess blood.” The meaning of the earlier verse is that the poor man is in the habit of speaking beseechingly as he is in fear of people, lacking self-confidence; the rich man, however, will become pro- gressively more arrogant as his “so called” friends by appearing to agree with him, flattering him, reinforce his own self-esteem. This is why Solomon added immediately: (Proverbs 18,24) “a man who has friends must be friendly;” he is saved from both dangers. 1) The fact that he has friends means he has no need to be afraid of people and does not have to speak beseechingly; 2) the fact that he is of a friendly disposition saves him from becoming arrogant.
    Solomon cautions even such people not to “overdo this friendliness” by allowing themselves to become viewed as intruders in their friends’ homes when showing up at all hours, overstaying their welcome, etc. Unless such people practice restraint they are liable to find themselves unwelcome and hated after a while. Solomon compares the experience to people who eat honey, something delectable at the beginning but apt to become revolting when overindulged in. All of this is a simile for the principle never to overdo anything as even the best of virtues when practiced to excess is bound to turn people off. Rain is  certainly necessary for the plants on earth, for the climate, and for our general well being. Too much rain in too concentrated a form is not only no blessing but a curse. The reason that Solomon illustrated his point by choosing someone’s friend as the example is precisely because he wanted to drive home the point that not only should one keep one’s distance from the “wrong kind” of people, but one should even be discreet in one’s association with one’s friends as they too are entitled to a degree of privacy, etc.
    There are times for social intercourse, such as the gatherings mentioned earlier. Nonetheless, at other times, one must know when to leave the company of one’s friends in order to keep the relationship at its best level. When it is time to retire to bed one should not overstay one’s welcome resulting in resentment; neither should one stay at meal-times unless invited as one interferes with one’s friend’s family’s routine.
    A Midrashic approach: to Proverbs 25,17: (based on Rashi, Chagigah 7). On the one hand Solomon wrote הוקר רגלך מבית רעך, “visit your neighbour’s house sparingly;” on the other hand David wrote in Psalms 66,13 :אבא ביתך בעולות, “I enter Your house with burnt-offerings.” The apparent contradiction is resolved by applying the “house” mentioned in Proverbs to the occasions when one has to offer sin-offerings or guilt-offerings. One should strive to minimise the need for such visits to the Temple. On the other hand, the verse in Psalms refers to the occasions when one approaches G’d bearing burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, i.e. voluntary gifts, not offerings in order to obtain atonement and forgiveness. The message of this Midrash is that both Solomon and David refer  to the Holy Temple as “the house of your friend.” We find a similar comment by our sages when they said that the Israelites are called “friends” i.e. ריעים of the Lord, citing such verses as Psalms 122,8 למען אחי ורעי, “for the sake of my kin and friends...for the sake of the house of the Lord.” Solomon also says of G’d: רעך ורע אביך אל תעזוב, “do not abandon your friend or the friend of your father” (Proverbs 27,10), and in Song of Songs he speaks of זה דודי וזה רעי, “this is my beloved, and this is my friend” (Song of Songs 5,16). The thought behind all these verses is that a person should be careful not to sin so that he does not have to abuse his friendship with the Lord by entering His house too frequently in order to offer sin-offerings. It is best not to have to offer such offerings altogether.
    
    We find that the prophet Samuel (Samuel I 16,22) expresses similar sentiments when he says: “it is better to listen to G’d’s commandments (observe them) than to offer meat-offerings to the Lord (in the Temple).” The reference was to the animals captured from the Amalekites. which the people and Saul offered to G’d as sacrifices, consuming their meat. When Solomon counseled not to be a frequent visitor in one’s friend’s house he referred to the House of G’d who should remain one’s “friend.” When Solomon wrote in Proverbs 21,27 that the meat-offerings of the wicked are an abomination, he meant that at the time when a wicked person brings an offering to G’d, G’d automatically thinks of his sins turning the entire procedure into an abomination. However, when the offerings are not connected to sin but are brought by righteous people and this is reflected in the kind of animals being offered, David tells us that such offerings are welcome, i.e. אבא ביתך בעולות, “let me enter Your house with burnt-offerings.” One of the temptations we must resist is taking advantage of having a “friend” in the house of G’d to whom we bring זבח i.e. meat-offerings, as if it were something “He” needs, until “He gets fed up” with these frequent unwelcome intrusions by us. When David speaks about bringing burnt-offerings to the Temple, he means offerings which are to atone for sins not actually committed but contemplated. Such sinful thoughts occur mostly at night, and they are difficult for a person to be saved from as there are no social restrictions to man thinking sinful thoughts. He is not found out and his image with his peers is not affected by what he merely thinks about. This is one of the reasons that the time for bringing such an offering is the night when the sin is still fresh and can be forgiven immediately.
     
    6,2.  צו את אהרן ואת בניו לאמר, זאת תורת העולה, היא העולה על מוקדה על המזבח כל הלילה עד הבוקר ואש המזבח תוקד בו, “Command Aaron and his sons, saying: ‘this is the law of the burnt-offering: it is the burnt-offering that stays on the flame, on the Altar, all night until morning, and the fire of the Altar shall be kept aflame on it.’” According to the plain meaning of the text this paragraph dealing with the burnt-offering contains four elements. First of all it teaches that the burnt-offering is the most highly regarded of all the animal offerings and that its effect in obtaining forgiveness for its donor is very powerful indeed. The second lesson to be derived from this paragaph is that it is of the utmost importance for man to serve his Creator, and to do so visibly. The third lesson our paragraph teaches is that there occurred a great miracle on this Altar -on a regular basis. The fourth lesson is the great punishment which the wicked will incur because they spurn the opportunity to obtain atonement from G’d for their sins. They will suffer afflictions in gehinom which do not come to an end.
    
    Our sages (Rosh Hashana 17) say that even though the institution of gehinom may be abolished at some time in the future, the afflictions to which the wicked have been subjected will not thereby terminate. 
    
    It is worth reflecting on the fact that there are a total of 13 different categories of offerings corresponding to the 13 attributes of His which G’d revealed to Moses. (compare Maimonides Maaseh Hakorbanot 12,4). Five of these offerings consist of different combinations of meal-offerings מנחת סולת, מנחת מרחשת, מנחת מחבת, מנחת חלות, מנחת רקיקין. All of these are referred to by the term קרבן. The other eight categories of sacrifices are animal-offerings: The names of the offerings are: עולה, חטאת, אשם, תודה, שלמים, בכור, מעשר (בהמה), פסח. Some of the offerings (or part of them) may be eaten by the Priests, such as the חטאת, sin-offering; the אשם, guilt-offering, and the בכור, first-born male animal of the pure domesticated beasts. Other categories of offerings may be consumed by their owners (minus the parts reserved for the Priests and the Altar). Examples are: מעשר, the tenth animal of the new flock; the פסח, Passover (of which the Priest does not receive anything), and the תודה, thanksgiving- offering. The latter offering is mandatory if a person has been saved from danger through an obvious miracle, for instance (Berachot 54). He also has to bring such an offering if he has been cured from a normally fatal disease. The Talmud Berachot writes that these people are to bring the offering in question and to tell praises of the Lord in a loud voice. When a person celebrates joyful events such as a wedding, it is also appropriate to offer such sacrifices to the Lord in acknowledgment of His kindness. This is based on Jeremiah 33,11. There are also some sacrifices of which no part may be eaten by either the Priest or the owner. This is first and foremost the sacrifice discussed here, the עולה, burnt-offering, concerning which the Torah stipulated that all of it is to be burnt up on the Altar. This is the meaning of the word כליל, (verse 15). This burnt-offering is the most highly regarded of all the offerings and that is why the Torah emphasises that היא העולה, “it is the upwards striving offering, etc.” Similarly, in Ezekiel 10,20 when the prophet describes היא החיה אשר ראיתי, “this is the chayah which I saw.” the extra word היא shows that of a variety of similar offerings or beings the one singled out with this extra word is considered the most elevated, the most highly regarded.
    The burnt-offering also possesses the quality of atoning for sinful thoughts as we know from Job, 1,5 where we are told that Job would offer such burnt-offerings after family gatherings  during the various feasts in respect of each member of his family. [Had the offering been in respect of deeds committed, he would not have had to do this on behalf of everyone. Ed.] According to Ezekiel 20,32 this offering was in respect of sinful thoughts . 
    Seeing man entertains these kinds of thoughts mostly at night the offering may remain on the altar all night long to counteract the thoughts of the person at night which are not carried out until daytime on whose behalf it had been brought. The prophet Michah 2,1 phrases it thus: “Ah, those who plan iniquity and design evil on their beds; when morning comes they do it, for they have the power.” This is why the Torah commanded that the atonement should occur at the time the iniquity is being committed. Seeing that in essence the sin was insubstantive, i.e. only in the mind, the offering is to dissolve entirely in the wind, the smoke rising into the air. The animal, so to speak, returns to the regions of the spirit it came from. No substantive part of the world, i.e. a body, is allowed to derive any benefit from this offering. This is one aspect of the burnt-offering. 
    The second aspect is the lesson of how important it is for the creature to serve his Creator. It is a well known fact that man has to relate to his G’d from a position of being submissive, humble. One needs to demonstrate this both while praying and while performing any of the other relatively easy commandments or even the difficult commandments. One needs to remain aware that performance of such commandments is not meant to be a “feather in our cap,” but is meant to enhance G’d’s glory. We need to remain constantly aware that our flesh is weak and that it is not capable of fufilling the commandments in the manner they ought to be performed. We have to learn from Avraham who described himself as עפר ואפר, “dust and ashes,” though he had already offered his very life for Hashem (Genesis 18,27). King David expresseed a similar sentiment when he said (Psalms 15,4)  “man must be contemptible in his own eyes.” [he must feel that he has done less than a fraction of what is expected of him. Ed.]
    
    6,3. ולבש הכהן מדו בד ומכנסי בד ילבש על בשרו והרים את הדשן, “The Priest shall put on his fitted tunic and he shall put on linen trousers on his flesh; he shall remove the ash.” The Torah here teaches that even such a seemingly inconsequential activity as removing the ash from the altar is considered as part of the sacrificial service. Were this not so it would not be necessary for the Priest to don the garments reserved for performing service in the Temple or Tabernacle. 
    When the Torah writes the word מדו, “its measurement,” the meaning is that the garments are to be fitted individually to each Priest according to his size. The words על בשרו mean that they are to be worn directly on the skin, no other matter is to be a חציצה, a screen or intervening object, between the trousers (or the tunic in the appropriate part of the priest’s body). Furthermore, if the trousers were short and did not reach until the Priest’s feet, if he did perform the service while wearing such attire it would be considered as unfit, i.e. invalid. Why did the Torah mention only two of the Priest’s four garments? The fact is that having mentioned these two garments it is understood that the כהן הדיוט, ordinary Priest, must wear his four garments, and the High Priest his eight garments, for any part of the service that he performs. This is made plain by Sifra Tzav 2,1. They deduce this from the word ילבש, “he must don, etc.” One may also understand the very word מדו as referring to “garment,” such as when the word appears in Samuel I 17,39: מעל למדיו, “on top of his garment.” The word occurs in that context also in Psalms 133,2 על פי מדותיו, “over the top of his robe.” If that is the meaning of the word מדו here it automatically includes all of the Priest’s garments. Onkelos also translated the word as לבושין, “garments.”
    The ethical teaching of all this is that when performing sacred tasks, especially in the Temple, regardless of how demeaning the same task would be considered for a socially highly placed individual outside the sacred perecincts, one must wear the finest garments in order to enhance the reputation of the Lord in whose honour this whole service is being performed. If this holds true, we may learn that even when in the synagogue or the Yeshivah while studying Torah it is only elementary good manners vis-a-vis G’d whose Torah we study to be properly attired. We have learned from King David (Psalms 57,9) “awake, O my honour!  Awake, o harp and lyre! I will waken the dawn.” David did not speak about “Your honour”, i.e. the Lord’s honour, but he spoke about his own dignity, honour. He adresses himself, admonishing himself that his honour and dignity are of no consequence at all. We know that he lived up to this when he danced in front of the Holy Ark so that even his wife Michal considered such behaviour as unseemly in a King (compare Samuel II 6,14). We have an additional verse on that subject by David in verse 22 of that same chapter where he explains to Michal: “and dishonor myself even more, and be low in my own esteem, but amongst the slave-girls that you speak of I will be honoured.”
    
    Logic teaches that one cannot be considered a “slave” until one has a master. Neither can the term “master” have meaning unless this master owns a slave. The two terms are mutually exclusive, one not having any meaning without the other. Seeing man is a servant of his Creator and is obligated to serve Him as his Master, his service cannot be described as being carried out properly until after he has formally accepted his status (conditions implied in that relationship) as servant. These conditions include submissiveness and an appropriate degree of humility. He is not to carry himself as if he were someone of authority and was in control of matters as this would be an insult vis-a-vis the honour and dignity of his Master. This is why Solomon writes (Proverbs 25,6): ”do not exalt yourself in the king’s presence.” If such advice is good advice, how much more so is it good advice when applied to one’s posture vis-a-vis the King of Kings, the Lord! G’d’s “garment” is “grandeur,” as we know from Psalms 93,1 “the Lord is king, He is robed in grandeur.” Anyone daring to wear the king’s robes is guilty of treating him with contempt.
    Due to such considerations the Torah commanded the Priest who performs even such a relatively simple task as removing the ashes from the Altar to wear the appropriate garments when performing this task as he is, after all, G’d’s representative on earth. By performing such menial tasks, especially when dressed in garments testifying to his elevated status as Priest he humbles himself before his Master in heaven.
    We find that when Hillel the elder, was engaged in celebrating the libations of water on the festival of Sukkot, he danced  and said: אם אני כאן הכל כאן, אם אין אני כאן מי כאן? [when translated literally and superficially this statement seems like the height of arrogance, i.e. someone saying: “if I am here everybody and everything is here; if I am not here who is here?” Ed.] Of course, this is not what Hillel, famous for being self-effacing meant. He used the word אני as a pronoun for G’d, saying: “if G’d is present everybody (who counts) is present; if G’d is not present who is present?” He meant that there is no worthwhile presence other than the presence of G’d (compare Sukkah 53).
    Rabban Gamliel, (President of the Sanhedrin, Hillel’s grandson)  and his colleagues would dance in the courtyard of the Holy Temple and disport themselves in what we would call an undignified manner, all in honour of heaven, i.e. showing G’d that the decorous behaviour normally expected of them when fulfilling their functions vis-a-vis the people over whom they presided was not meant to accent their own importance but only to lend weight to the importance of the office to which they had been appointed. This is why they had to demonstrate to G‘d (in the presence of the people) that they themselves felt totally submissive and unimportant when compared to Him.
    You know that the Levites were the most “holy” tribe of the Israelites and that the Torah appointed them to walk behind the wagons transporting the components of the Tabernacle whenever the people were on the move. Walking behind the wagons was certainly a very minor kind of duty, something more appropriate to the least skilled and educated amongst the people. We read in Numbers 7,6-8: “Moses (personally) took the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites. Two carts and four oxen he gave to the Gershonites, as required for their service, and four carts and eight oxen he gave to the Merarites, as required for their service.” These verses teach you that a person (Moses as well as the Levites) has to “lower” his own dignity in order to accord honour to the Lord. These verses prompted our sages (Bamidbar Rabbah 4,20) to say “when someone does indeed diminish his own stature in order to enhance the stature of heaven then not only will heaven’s stature be enhanced through his actions but his own stature will be enhanced also. Conversely, if someone tries to enhance his own stature at the expense of heaven’s stature, his own stature will suffer whereas heaven’s stature remains unimpaired.”
    In connection with this subject we find that a man by the name of Issachar, a resident of a village called Barkai, was punished as he was desecrating sacred property while bestowing honour upon himself. Our sages in Pessachim 57 speak of four indignities which occurred in the courtyard of the Temple. [The Talmud presents the matter as if the courtyard were a person and gave voice to its feelings. Ed.] The result of the first indignity was the expulsion of the sons of the High Priest Eli from the holy precincts because they had caused defilement inside those precincts with their conduct. A second occasion when the courtyard banned someone from its precincts was an incident involving this Issachar from the village of Barkai who had “used” the Temple to enhance is own stature at the expense of the sacred contents of the Temple. His sin consisted in the fact that he was too considerate of his own hands, wrapping them in silk before performing his priestly duties. A third occasion which provoked protest by the courtyard was when the courtyard called out protesting angrily שאו שערים ראשיכם, “raise your heads o gates and observe how Yochanan son of Narbai, disciple of Pankai enters the sacred precincts and stuffs his belly with the meat of the sacrifices.” They said of this man that he had a daily intake of 300 calves and that he drank three hundred jars of wine daily and had 40  measures of pigeons as dessert. [whenever the number 300 appears in the Talmud it is a figure of speech employed to describe unbelievably big quantities. Ed.] They say furthermore that as long as this Yochanan son of Narbai was alive there was never any leftover sacrificial meat to which the law that it had to be burned needed to be applied. What happened to this Issachar from Barkai? Another person concerning whose conduct in the holy precincts the courtyard protested was a certain Yishmael son of Pabi, disciple of Pinchas whom the courtyard was instrumental in appointing as High Priest in lieu of the infamous Issachar. It happened once during his time that the king and queen sat at the table arguing whether the taste of a young goat or that of a young sheep was superior. The queen favoured the taste of the young sheep (lamb) whereas her husband the king preferred the taste of the kid (young male goat). In order to settle their argument they called in this Issachar and seeing that he had eaten plenty of either animal in his capacity as High Priest they asked him which tasted better. Thereupon this Issachar made a disrespectful motion with his hand indicating that the question was silly as if the goat’s meat were better surely the Torah would have stipulated that the daily public burnt-offering should consist of a male young goat. When the king observed that the High Priest had failed to observe good manners and had waved his hand about, he decreed that the offending hand of the High Priest be cut off. Issachar bribed the executioner to cut off his left hand instead of his right hand. When the matter of the bribe became known he lost his right hand also. Upon hearing about this, Rabbi Yossi asked his students the rhetorical question of what caused the High Priest Issachar to become a victim of such cruelty? The student Rabbi Ashi said  that it was his failure to have studied the relevant Mishnah in which it is stated that  sheep always take precedence over goats. Nonetheless, Rabbi Ashi added that he thanked the Lord who punished this Issachar in this world so that he could enter the hereafter having already paid his dues. This is not the only time that someone in Biblical times was punished while on earth in order to preserve his reward in the hereafter intact. During the period of the prophet Isaiah and King Chiskiyahu (compare Isaiah 22,15) there was a certain scribe by the name of Shevna who according to some scholars was also the High Priest. At any rate, he was a highly placed individual who, if not the High Priest, was in charge of the King’s palace. Seeing he had treated sacrificial offerings with  disdain, he was killed by Sancheriv, King of Assyra. Concerning this Shevna the prophet Isaiah said  quoting G’d: (Isaiah 22,25) “the peg fixed in a firm place shall give way.” Isaiah had prophesied his downfall and it had been fulfilled in his lifetime in order for Shevna’s merits for the hereafter to be preserved intact. [The nature of Shevna’s sin has been the subject of much disagreement. Our author’s assumption that he was remiss in his attitude to the Altar is difficult to substantiate. Ed.]
    The third matter which this paragraph of the Torah teaches us is the great and ongoing miracle which was an adjunct of this Altar. We are speaking about the so-called copper altar which was overlaid with a sheet of copper the thickness of the coin called dinar in those days. The fire on top of the Altar never ceased to burn. Neither the wood underneath the copper was burned by the heat nor did the copper crack, melt, or otherwise lose its effectiveness. This was one of the 18 miracles which occurred in connection with the Tabernacle and the first Temple (they are listed in Pirke Avot chapter 5,7 and another eight in Yuma 21). The Torah draws attention to this miracle by repeating the fact that the fire on the Altar was never to go out. (verses 2 and 5). Seeing the Torah had already stipulated in verse 2 that the fire had to be kept going, what need was there to repeat this in verse 5? Clearly, what is a commandment in verse 2 is a promise in verse 5, i.e. the fire would never go out. Not only that, but the Altar itself would remain undamaged.
    The fourth matter which this paragraph of the Torah teaches us is the magnitude of the punishment suffered by the wicked during their stay in gehinom. This explains why the fire on the Altar is mentioned a third time in our paragraph in verse 6., where the Torah writes: “a permanent fire shall remain aflame on the Altar; it shall not be extinguished.” Seeing that the purpose of the Altar is to secure atonement the wicked are not in line for such atonement because they had denied the power and function of the Altar and the sacrificial offering thereon. The Torah therefore hints by repeating this message about the never-dying fire that it is a hint to the wicked of what is in store for them. The prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 33,14) remonstrated with the people saying to them: “Sinners in Zion are frightened, the godless are seized with trembling; ‘who of us can dwell with the never-dying blaze?’” These sinners had become frightened of the very fire whose power they had been in the habit of mocking when they refused to repent and to accept atonement. This is also what the verse in Isaiah 33,14 is all about which means that the wicked are to be made afraid of the fires of gehinom concerning which it is written in Isaiah 66,24 that their worms shall not die, nor their fires quenched, they shall be a horror to all flesh.” The meaning of “it shall not be quenched” in Isaiah is parallel to the words “it shall not go out or die” in our verse here.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Tzav 2) to the words היא העולה, “it is the burnt-offering.” The reference is to the Roman Empire which is the most arrogant Empire, constantly aggrandizing itself. The same Midrash also states that anyone who aggrandizes himself will eventually be judged by fire. They base this on what happened to the generation of the deluge  who had boasted of their own importance saying: (Job 21,15)  “who is Shaddai that we should serve Him?” They were judged by fire as it is written (Job 6,17) ”when they thaw they vanish; in the heat they disappear where they are.” The people of Sodom were judged by fire because they were too proud, as we know from Ezekiel 16,49: “Only this was the sin of your sister Sodom: ‘arrogance!’ She and her daughters had plenty of bread and untroubled tranquillity; “ they were judged by fire as we know from Genesis 19,24: “G’d caused it to rain on Sodom and Gomorrah sulfur and fire.” Pharaoh was also judged by fire seeing he was so arrogant and had said: “who is Hashem that I should listen to Him?” (Exodus 5,2). He had also claimed: “the river Nile belongs to me and I have created it!” (Ezekiel 29,3). We know that he was judged by fire from Psalms 18,14: “Then the Lord thundered from heaven, the Most High gave forth His voice, hail and fiery coals.” We have also been told in Exodus 9,24: ”there was hail which contained fire within it.” Another arrogant king who was punished by fire was Sancheriv who had boasted (Kings II 19,23) “it is I who have climbed the highest mountains, to the remotest parts of Lebanon, and have cut down its tallest cedars, its choicest cypresses.” He was judged by fire as we know from Isaiah 10,16 ”and under its body (כבודו) shall burn a burning like that of fire, destroying frame and flesh.” Something similar happened to boastful Nebuchadnezzar who had been arrogant enough to proclaim (Isaiah 14,14): I will mount the back of a cloud- I will match the Most High.” He had also said (verse 13): “I will climb to the sky higher than the stars of G’d.” Furthermore, he had said: (Ovadiah 4)  that he would ascend beyond the stars. As a result of such boastful statements by their king, his soldiers were burned by fire.
    When you check Daniel 3,3 where the preparations for the inauguration of Nebuchadnezzar’s giant golden image are described, mention is made of eight nations, i.e. you will find the names: Adragozariah and seven others. When mention is made of the celebration a second time, i.e. in verse 27, we find that 4 of these nations are no longer mentioned. The Talmud Sanhedrin 92 suggests that the other four nations (i.e. their honour guards representing them at Nebuchadnezzar’s court) had been burned to death. According to Rashi it was the same fire which consumed the men heating the kiln into which Chananyah, Mishael and Azaryah were to be thrown.” Thus far the Midrash (approximately. Ed.]
    When the Torah in our paragraph wrote: “command Aaron and his sons,” this is very unusual as throughout the Portion of Vayikra we find Aaron’s sons mentioned instead of their father such as: “the sons of Aaron shall throw, etc.” (Leviticus 1,14), or “the sons of Aaron will (arrange) prepare” (Leviticus 1,8.). The reason that in these instances Aaron was ignored is still the fallout from his part in the making of the golden calf. When Moses became aware of this he said to G’d: “how can a well be hated whereas the water it produces is well beloved?” If You G’d have honoured the wood (to be used on the Altar) on account of  its offspring as we know from Tamid 2,3 that all kinds of logs are suitable to be used as kindling on the Altar with the exception of olive wood and the wood of the grape vine, surely Aaron should be admitted on the Altar if only on account of the fine sons he had produced!” When our portion starts with the words: “command Aaron and his sons,” etc., this reflects G’d’s response to Moses’ plea on behalf of his brother.
    A rational/investigative approach to the words: “this is the law of the burnt-offering; it is the burnt-offering, etc.” The Torah here alludes to the superior nature of the soul, the intellectual part of man. The words may be understood as if the Torah had written: “this is the superior nature of the soul which is constantly ascending on account of the input by the Torah which is the subject of the pronoun היא “she” in our verse.” There are numerous instances in the Bible where the Torah is referred to by the pronoun היא, such as in Proverbs 3,18 עץ חיים היא למחזיקים בה, or in Psalms 19,8 תורת ה' תמימה משיבת נפש, i.e. that the soul is enabled to return to its Maker thanks to the Torah it has studied. 
   על מוקדה על המזבח, these words are also an allusion to the lofty nature of the intellectual part of man which is able to rise beyond the world of the planets and  which is superior even to the attributes with which angels have been equipped. The word מוקדה, is reminiscent of the world of the planets whereas the word מזבח, alludes to all the angels. We could understand the. words  על מוקדה as if the Torah had written על האש, “above the fire,” such as in Isaiah 10,16: “and it wastes away on account of the heat.” [the heat described is fever burning up man’s flesh. Ed.] Our author understands the word אש in this verse as a reference to the sun, i.e. the soul will rise higher than the sun. He views the sun as the immediate cause of all movements involving fire. In a similar way he views the moon as the origin of all influences on the motion of water.
    King Solomon, who, in his Book Kohelet 1,9, describes all the things in this world as being תחת השמש, “beneath the sun,” makes an exception when he refers to the soul (רוח), and describes it as ascending beyond that domain, i.e. העולה היא למעלה, “which ascends on high” (Kohelet 3,21). In other words, the spiritual-intellectual part of man has access to regions above the sun which itself serves as a model for the entire planetary system in Solomon’s summation. In Solomon’s time the sun was viewed as the central planet, the middle one out of a total of seven. As such it is considered symbolic of the essence of the system as Solomon always counsels that man take the “middle path,” stay away from extremes, from fringes.
    When the Torah continues with the word על המזבח this is a simile for the lofty spiritual niveau of the angels, the expression מזבח being a term including all of the angels, the species, so to speak. Just as the altar on earth is a site for the sacrifices which express G’d’s goodwill towards man seeing G’d Himself describes the sacrifices as ריח ניחוחי which Onkelos translates as “that which I accept with goodwill” (Numbers 28,2), so all that the angels are doing is to congregate around G’d in order to carry out His will and to listen to His instructions (compare Psalms 103,20).
    When the Torah continues speaking about כל הלילה עד הבוקר, “all night long until morning,” this is an explanation of the merit which enables man’s soul to ascend to these lofty spiritual regions, and what it is that enables it to soar so high above the domain of both the planetary system and that of the angels. The merit is the preoccupation with Torah and its precepts. It is presumed that the fact that the soul is imprisoned in a body in this terrestrial world is equivalent to its residing in the “night,” i.e. לילה. If the soul will spend the time it is imprisoned in a night-like earth by devoting itself to Torah until בוקר, until morning, i.e. until it is released from that imprisonment, then it will soar to regions above those inhabited by the angels, even. The “morning” the Torah speaks of here is a morning which does not bring with it disappointments (compare Samuel II 23,4 where David extols such a morning describing it as “without clouds”).
    When the Torah continues with ואש המזבח תוקד בו, ”and the fire of the Altar shall be kept aflame on it,” the meaning is that notwithstanding the fact that the “fire” of the angels is very strong and powerful, the “fire” of the righteous described outclasses even that of the angels.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words היא העולה may be understood as והיא מתהלכת, “it keeps progressing,” (compare Ezekiel 1,13, i.e. “it made progress amongst all these chayot spiritual, disembodied  beings”). The Torah describes a virtue which commences the ascent of the soul towards the “quarry” in heaven from which it was originally “hewn. The process is set in motion with the thoughts of the person offering the sacrifice. (compare author’s comments on Leviticus 1,9  last paragraph page 1486, this Editor’s translation)
    
    6,7. וזאת תורת המנחה, “and this is the law of the meal-offering.” Actually this had already been mentioned in Leviticus 2,1 where the Torah wrote: “if a person wishes to offer a meal-offering, etc.” It is mentioned here again on account of four additional commandments listed in this paragraph. 1) It has to be eaten as unleavened bread; 2) It has to be consumed inside the courtyard of the Tabernacle (Temple) as the Torah writes: “in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting they shall eat it” (6,9). 3) It may be eaten only by male priests (verse 11). 4) It confers sanctity on anything which touches it. This means that such matters will henceforth be subject to the stringent regulations governing holy things. Even when things which are already “holy,” such as parts of offerings which have the status of קדשים קלים, “sacred matters of a relatively mild level of sanctity,” touch the meal-offering, they will be upgraded in their sanctity, i.e. be subject to the more stringent regulations of קדשי קדשים, “most holy things.”
    
    6,13. זה קרבן אהרן ובניו, “this is the offering of Aaron and his sons.” Our sages have told us that there were four matters which Moses found difficult to comprehend, and that the offering Aaron was to bring on the day he was anointed was one of them. The four are easy to remember when one thinks of the first letters of them forming the word מקש'ה, i.e. “he has trouble under-standing.” [they are the laws of the מנורה, קרבן, שקלים, החדש, (laws about the lampstand, the sacrifice (of Aaron), the coin called shekel hakodesh, and the legislation of the new moon).The mystical dimension of our verse is this: the word זה in the sequence זה קרבן אהרן  ובניו אשר יקריבו לה', refers to an attribute Aaron and his sons are to offer. They are to present G’d with a certain  character-virtue represented by this offering about which the Torah now gives the measurements and components. When the prophet Ezekiel 44,27 speaks about the inauguration sacrifices of the third Temple, he also lists the size and composition of that sacrifice as consisting of עשירית האפה סולת, calling it “a sin-offering.”(although Ezekiel did not spell out what this sin-offering consisted of the Talmud Moed Katan 15-16 states that it was the same as that mentioned in our verse here). Since no specific sin was being atoned for, the meaning is that this offering symbolised a spiritual cleansing of the priest prior to his commencing his sacred vocation.
    
    6,16. וכל מנחת כהן כליל תהיה, לא תאכל, “and every meal-offering of a Priest is to be whole (completely consumed by the Altar), it shall not be eaten (by man).” The meaning of this verse is that any offering brought by the Priest as a voluntary offering shall be like the burnt-offering, i.e. all of it remaining on the Altar going up in flames. Our sages (Sotah 23) use the word כהן as restrictive, meaning that what is written here does not apply to an offering brought by a female Priest. There are many laws which dscriminate between male and female Priests, i.e. daughters of a Priest, one of them being that whereas the meal-offering of a male Priest may not be eaten, the corresponding voluntary meal-offering offered by a female Priest may be eaten. Whereas a male Priest is cautioned not to defile his body there is no such law which applies to a female Priest. Our sages derive this from the words בני אהרן, “the sons of Aaron,” i.e. not the daughters of Aaron (Leviticus 21,1). The reason why Priests of the female gender are discriminated against is the fact that women introduced mortality into the world. This is why it is not appropriate to have women Priests offer sacrifices, seeing the procedures are designed to preserve life not result in mortality. This accounts for the fact that a male Priest must not marry a divorced woman,  whereas a female Priest is permitted to marry a divorced Priest. Similarly, the gifts provided by the Torah are given only to male Priests, not to female Priests. Halachically speaking, while these gifts may be presented only to male Priests in order for the party handing it over to be discharging his obligation, female Priests are allowed to eat the parts known as קדשים קלים, sacred matters of a relatively mild degree of sanctity.
    Maimonides writes in his Moreh Nevuchim section 3 chapter 4 that the reason for the ruling “every meal-offering of the Priest is to be whole, it may not be eaten (by humans)” is  the fact that when a Priest offers such an offering he does in effect offer his very essence to G’d. If he were allowed to eat even part of that offering he would in effect “eat himself” and nullify what he had hoped to achieve when presenting his offering to G’d. The only parts of the meal-offerings of the individual which are burned up on the Altar (for G’d’s consumption) are the frankincense and the fistful of the flour and oil mixture. If he were allowed to consume the fistful of meal it would appear as if nothing remained for the Lord at all. Due to considerations of this nature the Torah decreed that all of the offering be burned.
    
    6,18. זאת תורת החטאת, “this is the law of the sin-offering.” The Torah refers to this offering as קדש קדשים, “it is most holy,” the same description applied to the meal-offering. Similarly, the status of the guilt-offering אשם is also that of “the most holy” (7,1). The sequence of subjects dealt with in the various paragraphs is as follows: the paragraph dealing with the burnt-offering, followed by the meal-offering; this is followed by the paragraph dealing with the sin-offering, which in turn is followed by the guilt-offering. All of the foregoing are described as “the most holy,” At the conclusion of all these paragraphs the Torah states once more: “this is the law for the burnt-offering, the meal-offering, the sin-offering and the guilt-offering.” The reason that these sacrifices and their laws are all lumped together is that the Torah wanted to explain the rules pertaining to offerings called “most holy.”
    Following the sacrifices referred to as “most holy,” the Torah discusses the rules pertaining to the offerings known as קדשים קלים, “sacred matters of a milder degree of sanctity.” Examples of the latter are the peace-offerings, and the thanksgiving-offerings.
   במקום אשר תשחט העולה תשחט החטאת, “The sin offering is to be slaughtered in the same place as the burnt-offering.” The burnt-offering must be slaughtered in the northern part of the courtyard (עזרה). It is offered to atone for sinful thoughts as has been mentioned earlier at the beginning of this portion. Seeing that the Torah did not want to embarrass the sinner offering a sin- offering, we are told that his offering has been assigned the same site for slaughter as the burnt-offering which is totally burned up on the Altar, i.e. an offering very dear to the Lord. Seeing that this is so, an outsider will not know whether the person offering this particular offering was guilty of an actual trespass or whether he was guilty only of sinful thoughts.
    
    6,19. הכהן המחטא אותה יאכלנה, “the Priest who is instrumental in conferring atonement through it, he shall consume it.” The meaning of these words is not that the Priest who sprinkles the blood on the Altar and burns up the fat parts is to be the only one to consume the meat of this offering, and that the other Priests are not to receive any part thereof. If this were so it would lead to friction amongst the Priests as each one would say that he wants to perform the service of the sin-offering. Rather, the meaning of the word המחטא, refers to all the Priests theoretically suitable to perform this procedure, so that only the temporarily ritually impure Priests are excluded by these words. Even Priests who suffer from a brief ritual impurity such as the emission of semen, something that can be purified by sunset, are excluded from eating any part of the sin-offering or guilt-offering offered on the day of their impurity. Neither could they share in the eating of the meal-offerings or be recipients of the chest and upper thigh of peace-offerings which the owners have to give to the Priests.
    We know that this rule applies in the case of the sin-offering as the Torah writes הכהן המחטא אותה יאכלנה; the Torah writes in connection with the guilt-offering: הכהן אשר יכפר בו לו יהיה, “it will belong to the Priest who performs the atonement rites on it” (7,7). In connection with the peace-offering the Torah writes (7,14) “the Priest who sprinkles its blood, it shall be his.” In connection with the meal-offering the Torah writes (7,9) “every meal-offering baked in an oven....it shall be the Priest’s who offers it up.” Seeing that all the aforementioned sacrifices are of the category which the Torah described as “most holy,” and may be consumed only on the day they are being offered, anyone who was not ritually pure at that time is automatically excluded from eating part of such an offering seeing it cannot be saved up for the following day.
    
    6,20. תכבס במקום קדוש, “you shall wash in a holy place.” We have already learned from the previous verse that the reference is to the courtyard of the Tabernacle, as it has been spelled out with the words: “it shall be eaten as unleavened bread in a holy place, the courtyard of the Tabernacle.” This courtyard corresponded to what was called עזרה during the period of the Temple.
    
    6,21. וכלי חרס אשר תבושל בו ישבר, “and an earthenware vessel which it has been cooked in must be broken.” This means that the boiling of the meat must also take place in the sacred precincts, just as the washing had to take place in sacred precincts.
   ואם בכלי נחושת בשלה ומרק ושטף במים, “But if it was boiled in a copper vessel, it should be purged and rinsed in water.” These words are also governed by the previous rule that this must take place in sacred precincts. Every procedure took place in a מקום קדוש “a holy site,” i.e. the washing, the breaking, or the rinsing.
    Rashi explains that the reason the earthenware vessel had to be broken is that seeing this is a porous material which does not release what it has once absorbed, the remains of the meat would be נותר, “leftover,” on the day following the offering of that sacrifice, and as such it is subject to destruction by fire (normally, when the meat is identifiable). In this instance the next best way of destroying any vestige of what is left over is to break the vessel.
    The term ומורק is related to the expression תמרוקי הנשים which we read about in Esther 2,12, i.e. “feminine cosmetics.” The entire procedure of purging and rinsing it is designed to remove any part of it which was absorbed by the copper walls of the vessel in question. Seeing that the walls of an earthenware vessel do not yield up what they have once absorbed, the vessel itself must be destroyed. 
    The Torah informs us here that copper vessels as well as vessels made of other kinds of metal in which forbidden food has been cooked are subject to cleansing through boiling water and that mere rinsing out with water is not sufficient for these vessels to become usable again for other foods. By contrast, earthenware vessels cannot be made fit again and thus have to be destroyed.
    Water possesses three properties (powers), depending on whether it is cold, lukewarm, or boiling. If the forbidden item fell into cold water the metal vessel which contained such a mixture only has to be thoroughly rinsed out before it is again fit for use. If the water in the vessel was lukewarm when the forbidden item fell into it, it does not suffice to rinse it with cold water but the vessel has to be rinsed out with lukewarm water, i.e. of at least the same degree of warmth as  the water into which the forbidden object had fallen. If the water in the vessel was boiling-hot when the forbidden item fell into it, neither of the previous two procedures are adequate to cleanse out this vessel and make it fit for use again, but it must be cleansed through being immersed in boiling water. The scientific principle underlying the procedure is that the way to reverse the process of the walls of the metal vessel absorbing some of the forbidden substance is through a repetition of the conditions during which this had occurred in the first place, i.e. כבולעו כך פולטו, “in the same way that it penetrated it will escape.” 
    As a result of such considerations, our sages (Avodah Zarah 75) state that vessels which are normally used cold such as cups, water carafes, etc., need only to be washed out properly before they can be used again on Passover. Pots and kettles which are placed on the stove and used hot need to be immersed in boiling water and afterwards they are considered as having been cleansed. Utensils which are used directly on the fire, such as spits, roasting pans, etc., need to undergo a process of being made red-hot else they cannot be used again for permissible food including Passover. The reason is that whatever has penetrated the pores of the metal will not contract and come out by any other process. After you have heard that the forbidden particles do not resurface except by the application of a reverse process of how they penetrated in the first place, you may ask why the Torah writes concerning such a vessel ישבר, “it shall be broken,” using the third person, indirect speech. When speaking of the need to wash the vessel in verse 20, the Torah used direct speech writing תכבס i.e. ”you shall wash.” The difference is that  the procedure of breaking the vessel consists of breaking it into several pieces to ensure it cannot be used again for its original purpose. Had the Torah employed the form תשבר, we would have concluded that it must be broken into such small fragments that it is unfit for further use of any kind. The form תשבר in that sense occurs in Psalms 48,7 תשבר אניות תרשיש, a reference to ships bound for Tarshish which would or did break up utterly to frustrate their attempt to invade the land of Israel. On the other hand, when a relatively minor fracture is described such as in Judges 7,20 where the earthenware broke as a result of sound waves, the author speaks of וישברו הכדים instead of ותשברו הכדים, to tell us that all that happened was that these jars could no longer hold water or wine as a result of becoming fragmented. The shards could be used for other functions. When the Torah writes in Leviticus 11,33: כל אשר בתוכו יטמא ואותו תשבורו, “all that is contained therein becomes defiled, and the vessel itself you shall break,” and it did not say תשברו, “shall be broken,” this means (Keylim 2,1) that the act of their becoming broken purifies the shards for further use. Our sages mean that as soon as the vessel has been broken it no longer bears its original “name,” i.e. connotation, and as such its constituent parts may be used freely. When the Torah writes in connection with eating the Passover in Egypt, (Exodus 12,46) “you must not break a bone of it,” this means that the bones must not even be broken in half. It is typical of free people not to consider the bones as valuable once they have finished eating the meat attached to them. Only slaves, destitute people, try to get at the marrow inside the bones.
    Our sages (Yuma 21) explained that the shards of such earthenware vessels which had become defiled became miraculously absorbed by the floor of the עזרה, the courtyard of the Tabernacle/Temple. Had this miracle not occurred the floor would have become so filled with these shards as to make walking there impossible. This was also one of the eighteen miracles which we mentioned earlier as occurring regularly in connection with the Temple. Here is a list of all these eighteen miracles: 1) no pregnant woman ever lost her fetus prematurely on account of the smell of the sacrificial meat being burned up. 2) This sacrificial meat never exuded an unpleasant odour. 3) The High Priest was never incapacitated on Yom Kippur due to involuntary emission of semen. 4) There never was found a fly in the area designated for slaughtering and dressing the animals. 5) No blemish which would disqualify the offering of the first two loaves of the new barley harvest (Omer) or the first two loaves of the new wheat harvest (Shtey Halechem) ever occurred. The same applied to the “show-breads” offering presented in the Temple every Sabbath. These three offerings were considered as one in the count of the miracles which occurred. 6) The rains never extinguished the flames on the woodpile of the Altar (which had no roofing). 7) Even the strongest wind would never deflect the column of smoke rising from the offerings being burned. The reference is, of course, to the fire contributed by man, not to that which descended from heaven. The Priests were commanded to contribute their own fire in Leviticus 1,7. Although fire descended from heaven, it was a positive commandment for the Priests to contribute fire of their own  (Sifra Vayikra 4 [5,10].The reason for this was that the heavenly fire did not leave behind a trail of smoke, as pointed out in Yuma 21, where five peculiarities of the heavenly fire on the wooodpile of the Altar are listed. This fire is described as: “crouching like a lion, disappearing like the sun, its flame being tangible, consuming the wet and the dry alike, not producing smoke.” Rabbi Chaninah there claimed that when he saw this fire it was not crouching like a lion but like a dog. The Talmud answers this by saying that the fire which descended from heaven during the first Temple crouched like lion; the fire which descended during the second Temple crouched like a dog. 8) Although people stood very close together so that they had to touch one another (during the festivals), when the ritual called for them to prostrate themselves on the ground, they miraculously found adequate room for this. [an aspect of the extra-terrestrial nature of the Temple Mount, as was evident also concerning the size of the wings of the cherubs in the Temple which according to their description could not fit into the terrestrial dimensions described there. Ed.] 9) No scorpion or snake ever bit anybody within Jerusalem. 10) No one was ever heard to complain that there were no lodgings in Jerusalem so that he had to spend the night outside the city. The foregoing are the ten miracles listed in the fifth chapter of Pirke Avot.
    The remaining eight miracles were as follows: 11) the shards of earthenware vessels which served as pots to boil the remains of the sin-offerings and which had to be burned or destroyed as the tiny fraction absorbed by the walls became נותר, “leftover,” and as such forbidden, were absorbed by the floor of the courtyard of the Temple. 12) The Altar for the burnt-offering (the one in the courtyard) which had a woodpile on it which was kept aflame and which stood on a thin copper overlay, never melted the copper nor damaged the wooden beams underneath it. (Tanchuma Terumah 11). 13) All seven lights of the candlestick in the Sanctuary were constantly at the same level of oil, none burning faster or slower than its counterpart. None of them ever went out before dawn (Shabbat 22). During the long winter nights there was never insufficient oil, nor was there an excess of oil during the short summer nights. The light in the centre shaft had the same amount of oil as those on either side of it. It would be the first one to be lit in the evenings and the last one to be cleaned in the morning. 14) A tongue of red coloured wool would be hung at the entrance of the Sanctuary at the beginning of Yom Kippur; this would turn white by evening of the day (Yuma 67). 15) The scapegoat which was thrown off a cliff would break up in innumerable pieces before it ever hit the bottom of the valley into which it was thrown. Not a single of its limbs would remain intact by that time. 16). Concerning the Menorah procedure I have seen the following comment in Tanchuma Tetzaveh 3: When the lights of the Menorah in the Sanctuary were kindled in the evening, every courtyard in Jerusalem made use of the illumination provided by it. This is the mystical dimension of Exodus 27,20: “they shall take for you pure olive oil, pressed, to provide illumination.” 17) As soon as Solomon had built the Temple he planted in it all kinds of confections made of gold which would produce fruit at the appropriate  seasons. This is what we have been told in Yuma 21. 18) Another miracle related there is that the show-breads which were placed on the Table in the Temple every Sabbath retained their warmth at the same level as when they had come from the oven for the entire week. This is based on Samuel I 21,7 לשום לחם חם ביום חלוקו, “to place bread which was still hot on the day it was shared out” (8 days after it had been baked). Rabbi Yoshua ben Levi said that a great miracle occurred with the show-breads, i.e. that it was as hot and fresh when it was removed from the Sanctuary as when it was introduced there. He quotes the verse from Samuel in support of this. The question is raised there: “were there then no other miracles?” Did not Levi say that the place where the Holy Ark stood did not consume terrestrial space, and Samuel (the Amora) said that the cherubs stood by means of a miracle!” The answer given is that only miracles which were visible to the people, i.e. the ones which were manifest outside the actual Sanctuary were included in the count. This does not mean that there were no additional miracles inside the Sanctuary.
    
    7,8. והכהן המקריב את עולת איש, “and the Priest who offers a person’s burnt-offering, etc.” the word: “the Priest” does not apply exclusively to one individual Priest, suggesting that his colleagues on duty on that day do not have a share in that hide. The word has to be understood in the same vein as the word המחטא in 6,19 where we already explained that the Priest in question is not the only one eating of that sacrifice. The words הכהן המקריב apply to any Priest who is in a fit state to perform the service at that time, i.e. the Priests of that roster. [there were a total of 24 rosters of Priests who performed the Temple Service in rotation. Ed.] Anyone of that roster who was ritually impure at the time was excluded from participating even in receiving part of the hide. The reason that the Torah adds the words אשר הקריב, “which he had offered,” words which appear superfluous, is that the entitlement to the hide does not begin until after the procedures of offering the animal have been completed, not at the time when the hide was removed from the carcass. If, for argument’s sake, it was discovered after the animal in question was slaughtered that it was diseased and not fit for burning up on the altar, the Priest has no claim to the hide. The same holds true if other errors occurred in the procedure such as the blood being spilled, etc. (compare Zevachim 103).
    Our sages say that all the animals underwent a physical examination prior to being slaughtered in order to minimise the chance of blemishes being found later. Even minor blemishes in the eye of animal were minutely examined at that time [to determine if this was a temporary or permanent blemish. Ed.] This is alluded to in the words “which he had offered,” meaning that after the examination the Priest had thought himself as entitled to that hide (compare Maimonides’  comments on Erchin 2,5).
    
    7,9. לכהן המקריב אותה, “to the Priest who offers it.”  Seeing that I might have thought that this meal-offering is exclusively that of the Priest who has offered it, the Torah adds in verse 10 “it shall belong to all the sons of Aaron, every man alike.” What precisely is meant by these words? The words mean that the members of the roster for that day are all equally entitled to participate in the edible parts of that meal-offering. The arrangement of these rosters is already referred to in Kings II 11,9 “The chiefs did as Yehoyadah (High Priest) ordered, each took his men-those who were on duty that week and those who were off duty that week- etc.” Whatever accrued to the roster of the priests during the week they would share equally. This is what the Torah wrote in Deut. 18,8 חלק כחלק יאכלו, “portion for portion they shall eat it.”
    The Torah here mentions each category of meal-offering separately by name first and afterwards added the words איש כאחיו, “each man alike,” to make sure that each Priest receives equal shares of each category of meal-offering, not that one Priest gets a share of the meal-offering baked in the oven whereas his colleague is compensated by getting his share from a meal-offering made in a deep pan. Even if the meal-offering consists of a mixture of fine flour and oil, מנחת הסולת, something not ready for immediate consumption as it is raw, the Priests also share in this alike. The reason the Torah teaches us this rule in connection with the most inexpensive type of offering, the meal-offering, is to make it clear that a similar rule applies to the sharing of the more expensive offerings, i.e. animal offerings. The compensation for performing the various duties in the Temple is the entitlement to the parts of the offering designated for the Priests. All Priests in a state of ritual purity belonging to the roster of the week (day) are entitled to share equally. [The week’s roster was divided into the six week days, each “roster” or משמר, being further divided into what are called בתי אבות, family groups, of which each performed the service on one of the weekdays, all participating on the Sabbath. Ed.] Although some Priests performed their part of the service individually whereas others did so in groups of two or three, each one qualified equally for the parts to be shared out. Even Priests whose duties did not require them to perform manual tasks were entitled (Taanit 26). The procedure followed was similar to the sharing of the spoils of war where the people of the “home-front” also shared equally with the soldiers who had gone into battle. (based on Nachmanides interpreting Samuel I 30,24).
    
    7,11. וזאת תורת זבח השלמים, “and this is the law of the peace-offerings, etc.” There were two types of peace-offerings, the one called תודה and the one simply referred to as שלמים. The תודה offering was accompanied by both unleavened bread and leavened bread. There were a total of 40 loaves, of which ten were leavened. The technical names for each group of ten loaves were: Matzah, Chametz, Rekikim, and Revuchim. This is all spelled out in verse 12, i.e. that these loaves be mixed with oil, unleavened wafers smeared with oil and scalded fine flour mixed with oil. The Torah there continues with verse 13: “With loaves of leavened bread shall he bring his offering, with his feast thanksgiving-offering.” In verse 14 we are told that -one of each of these types of loaves be offered “as a portion to the Lord; it shall belong to the Priest.” In other words, the Priest’s function here is to receive a tithe from the offering, 10%. It is very similar to the gift called תרומת מעשר which the Priest receives from the Levites in respect of the tithes the Levites had received from the Israelite farmers.
    Our sages (Menachot 77) explain that the total weight of the ten loaves of leavened bread was equivalent to the total weight of the other 30 leaves consisting of three types of unleavened wafers, etc., so that in effect there was an equal amount of leavened bread and unleavened bread which constituted the meal-offering part of the תודה. This can be deduced from the syntax of our verses seeing that the 30 loaves of unleavened wafers, etc., are all mentioned in a single verse, whereas the Torah devotes a separate verse to the ten loaves of leavened breads. This suggests that the quantity of what is mentioned in verse 12 is equal to the quantity (weight) of material mentioned in verse 13.
    The offering called שלמים without the word תודה, is not occasioned by the need to express one’s gratitude to Hashem for His having rescued one from danger of one kind or another, but is a free-willed offering called either נדבה or נדר, depending on the wording of one’s vow to donate such an offering. This is why the Torah introduces the legislation pertaining to such an offering with the words: “if his feast-offering (peace-offering) is for a vow or donation, etc.” (verse 16). Anyone bringing this kind of שלמים does not have to add the loaves of leavened and unleavened bread associated with the thanksgiving offering, תודה. [Seeing that it was mandatory to bring such an offering in Jerusalem on the three festivals requiring every male Jew to make this pilgrimage, the translation “feast-offering” as an alternative for “peace-offering” is quite appropriate. Ed.]
    There appears to be a contradiction here in the regulations concerning the תודה offering and the fact that it was made up partially of leavened loaves, seeing the Torah had stated elsewhere (Leviticus 2,11) that “no manner of leavened material or honey is to be offered up on the Altar.” The fact is that these loaves of the תודה offering were not put on the Altar at all. Hence there is no contradiction with what the Torah wrote in Leviticus 2,11. The loaves were only “waved” above the Altar not deposited or burned up on it.
    
    7,26. וכל דם לא תאכלו בכל מושבותיכם לעוף ולבהמה, “You shall not eat any blood in any of your settlements, be it the blood of birds or of a four-legged animal.” The precise wording of the restriction makes it clear that the “blood” of fish or grasshoppers may be eaten. Similarly, blood found in eggs is not subject to a Biblical prohibition (Keritut 20). Blood found in eggs is forbidden due to a Rabbinic decree and even then only if it is found in the yellow part of the egg, the yolk. If blood is found in the albumen, the white part of the egg, one has to throw out that part of the egg but may eat the yolk. This is the opinion of Rav Alfassi  (Chulin 22 and Maimonides Maachalot Assurot 3,9).
    However the Tossaphists on Chulin 64 claim that when such blood is found at the junction of the yolk and the albumen it is subject to a Biblical prohibition as this is the area where the chick begins to form. The reason that all scholars agree that blood found in the yolk is prohibited is the uncertainty about whether the chick begins to develop there, in which case the blood is considered already as part of the “flesh.” Seeing that the entity is not yet a bird, anyone eating of that egg would transgress the prohibition of eating שרץ השורץ על הארץ,  (Leviticus 11,41-42).
    
    7,30. את החזה להניף אותו תנופה לפני ה', “the breast in order to wave it as a wave-service before the Lord.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Priest would wave only the breast and not the thigh, seeing that in connection with he thigh the Torah writes:” the right thigh you shall give as a heave-offering to the Lord” (Leviticus 10,15), and no mention is made there about it being waved.
    However we find  the expression: “the thigh of the heave-offering  and the breast of the waving of the fire-offerings’ fat parts as a wave-service before the Lord.” This line creates the impression as if both the thigh and the breast were to be waved, and that after the waving the Priest would burn up the fat parts just like in the case of 7,31 where the Torah writes: “the Priest shall turn the fat into smoke on the Altar and the breast and the thigh shall be given to Aaron and his sons.” The Torah writes there (verse 32) “and the right thigh from your peace-offerings you shall present to the Priest.”
    According to Maimonides Maasseh Hakorbanot 9,6-7 the procedure of “waving” was as follows: The Priest would first place the fat parts on the hands of the owners of the sacrifice and the breast and thigh above them. He would then “wave” them together in front of the Altar. This “waving” of the thigh and breast was a motion similar to the motion performed when we shake the Lulav on Sukkot, i.e. in all six possible directions, forward and backward or upward and downward as the case may be. By doing this the owner acknowledges symbolically that the entire globe belongs to Hashem. 
    I believe that the reason that just the thigh and the breast were the parts of the animal selected for this procedure is because both in man and in animal these two parts of the body symbolise our movements, i.e. the impetus to move originates in the breast, i.e. in the heart, whereas the execution of the will to move is carried out by the leg, the thigh. The Talmud Sukkah 37 describes the reason for shaking the Lulav as symbolising our recognition that G’d owns all parts of the universe.
    Another allusion present in the upward and downward motion of these parts of the animal which after all represents its owner, is the concept of exile and redemption. The term מוליך used in the Talmud for the forward motion is reminiscent of the verse in Lamentations 1,6 וילכו בלא כח לפני רודף, “they could only walk feebly before the pursuer.” The backward motion symbolises redemption as the motion called מביא in the Talmud is reminiscent of the verse in Jeremiah 31,8: “here I will bring them in from the northland.” The reason upward and downward motions are performed also is to symbolise the One who raises His holy Presence Shechinah away from the Jewish people, reminding us of the verse in Ezekiel 11,23: “The Presence of the Lord ascended from the midst of the city.” The downward motion symbolises that this Shechinah will return to the Jewish people, i.e. descend to rest over us as promised in Isaiah 31,4 ”so the Lord will descend to make war against the mount and the hill of Zion (ushering in the final redemption).
    Finally, there is also an allusion to the resurrection of the dead in this procedure of the “waving.” The expression  מוליך is reminiscent of Kohelet 12,7 where Solomon speaks of the resurrection saying  רוח הולך, “the spirit is walking,” whereas also the word מביא is reminiscent of a similar connotation as it occurs as ותבא בהם הרוח ויחיו, “as soon as the spirit entered them (the bones and the skin and flesh) they revived” (Ezekiel 37,10). The word מעלה also is featured in connection with resurrection in Kohelet 12,7, where Solomon writes והרוח תשוב אל האלו-הים אשר נתנה, “and the spirit returns to the Lord Who had provided it;” finally, the word מוריד also appears in such a connotation in Ezekiel 37,9: “and blow into these slain ones that they may live.”
    
    7,37. זאת התורה לעולה, למנחה ולחטאת ולאשם, ולמלואים ולזבח השלמים,, “This is the law for the burnt-offering, the meal-offering, the sin-offering, the guilt-offering, the consecration offerings and the peace-offerings.” You will note that the order in which the categories of offerings are listed in this verse corresponds to the order in which they appear in the respective paragraphs in the Torah. The Torah commences in Vayikra with the rules of the burnt-offering, which are followed by the rules for the meal-offering, and so on.
    Why does the Torah in our verse suddenly insert the words: “and the offering of the consecration rites, smack in between the guilt-offering and the peace-offerings, whereas in the earlier paragraphs dealing with the sacrifices no mention is made of the מלואים, “consecration offerings” at all? This presents a problem. If we were to say that  the words קח את אהרן ואת בניו in 8,2 is the reference to the consecration offerings, then our entire order has been thrown out of gear. If, on the other hand, the consecration rites offerings are the ones mentioned in Parshat Tetzaveh (Exodus 29,35-42) the order listed in our verse here would also not be parallel to what the Torah had written thus far. Actually, the order is perfectly fine as the offerings listed in Parshat Tetzaveh as being offered by the Priests when they were consecrated do not represent a separate category of offering at all. You cannot compare these offerings to such sacrifices as the sin-offering, the guilt-offering, etc. If you will review the offerings listed in connection with the consecration rites you will find that they include such diverse sacrifices as the sin-offering, burnt-offering as well as peace-offerings. The very expression מלואים in the plural indicates that we are speaking of multiple categories of offerings here. All of the categories of offerings which formed part of the consecration rites have already been described by the Torah in detail before now. 
    Our verse here mentioned the burnt-offering first, concluding with the peace-offerings. The reason that the burnt-offering deserves to be mentioned first is that it is the choicest of the offerings. The reason why the peace-offering deserves to be the one with which the Torah concludes the list is that as indicated by its very name it brings about peace in the world which ensures the continued existence of the universe.
    Our sages (the men of the Great Assembly) who are responsible for  finalising the wording of our liturgy have made the blessing of peace the final benediction in the central prayer עמידה, as without this blessing all the other blessings are ultimately worthless seeing that they will not endure. Solomon similarly concluded his Song of Songs (8,10) with the words: “so I became in his eyes like someone who finds an abundance of peace.”
    Our sages (Menachot 110) state that peace is a blessing which is indispensable even in the celestial regions. They base this insight on Job 25,2: “Dominion and strength are His, He imposes peace in His heights.” On the words of our verse: “this is the law of the burnt-offering, etc.,” our sages in Menachot 110 say that anyone who studies the laws of these offerings is considered as if he had personally offered them on the Altar. What the sages mean is that once one has familiarised himself with the deeper meaning of each type of offering, it enables the student of these laws to gain new insights which in turn will strengthen his resolve to meticulously observe all the precepts of the Torah. Seeing that offering the sacrifices is also meant to bring us closer to G’d, it is no more than reasonable that studying these laws will have a similar effect. Such study and new resolve to observe the Torah will result in the sins of such people being forgiven, similar to their having performed the actual procedure of offering the relevant sacrifices. It is certainly unreasonable to suppose that the sages meant that the mere mouthing of the words of the oral Torah listing the detailed laws of the sacrificial rites would have such an elevating effect. There is a somewhat similar statement by the sages in Berachot 4 concerning people who recite Psalm 145 every day qualifying for a place in the hereafter. They certainly did not mean to imply that all that is necessary to ensure for one his place in the hereafter is a mindless recital of the words in that Psalm. What the sages meant was that by reflecting on the words in this Psalm and by understanding the allusions contained in them, the reader (student) will emerge with a newly strengthened belief in G’d and His loving care for mankind. This will trigger his serving G’d with greater intensity than before he had studied this Psalm. This in turn will result in that person earning or retaining his share in the world to come.
    It is because of such reasoning that the men of the Great Assembly have included in our daily prayers such sections as the fifth chapter of Zevachim and they added that G’d said that when this chapter is being recited “I will account it for you as if you had offered the sacrifices listed therein (all of them).”
    A Midrashic approach to our verse: “anyone studying the Torah with a view to performing it (עוסק) is considered as if he had offered a burnt-offering as well as all the other offerings mentioned in our verse.”
    Remember that the offerings are divided into nine different categories when you include the fact that different offerings had to be offered at different locations such as the ones which had to be slaughtered on the northern side of the Altar, the ones which could be slaughtered anywhere within the courtyard (עזרה), etc.; The nine types include: עולה, מנחה, חטאת, אשם, תודה, שלמים, בכור, מעשר,פסח.You are aware already that the number nine represents the highest number of emanations and what they represent which can be attained by mortal man. The reason that the Torah provides for nine different categories of offerings is to keep the thought alive in our minds that all the offerings have to be addressed to what is beyond the ninth emanation, i.e. exclusively to Hashem. and not to any spiritual force or attribute of His below that level. This idea has also been spelled out in Torat Kohanim (Sifra Vayikra 2,5) whose author stresses that we never find any lower attributes of G’d mentioned in connection with offerings, such as אל, אלהים or אלוהיך, for instance, but only the tetragram, i.e. the attribute known as י-ה-ו-ה. The reason for this is not to enable anyone to claim subsequently that he had offered his offering to a different attribute.
    Our sages (Sanhedrin 60) also stated that the meaning of the words בלתי לה' לבדו in Exodus 22,19 is that all sacrificial offerings must be directed to G’d’s attribute י-ה-ו-ה exclusively. Anyone dedicating his offering to a subordinate attribute even of G’d is guilty of a major trespass.
    The sacrifice was presented on the Altar. The Altar was ten cubits high as we know from Chronicles II 4,1 “its height was ten cubits.” Seeing that according to the Torah (Exodus 27,1) the height of the Altar was three cubits high, we have to understand  that the Torah referred only to the area on which the woodpile was prepared and lit. (the reference is to the “upper” cube, above the סובב, “rampart” on which the Priest walked around the Altar). The measurement given in Chronicles referred to the Altar in the Holy Temple, not the Tabernacle. Its location was never changed. This is the meaning of Chronicles I 22,1:  “and this is the Altar for the burnt-offering.” The site is the place where G’d created first man, Adam (Jerusalem Talmud Nazir 7,2). This is based on the statement there that “Man was created in the very place whence his atonement occurs, (the Altar).” This was also the site where both Adam, and Kayin and Hevel his sons offered their respective sacrifices, the ones described in Genesis. This is also where Noach offered is thanksgiving offerings after the deluge. It is also the site where Yitzchak was bound and where Avraham offered the ram in Yitzchak’s place. From all of these historical facts we can see that this was a very special place and serves for the offerings of the righteous  and pious in all ages.
    Seeing that there is such a special site for all the nine types of offerings we described earlier you will find that in connection with the patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov this site was described in the Torah as מקום, as we note in Genesis 22,3 “he (Avraham) arose and went to the מקום; (Genesis 22,4) “he raised his eyes and saw the מקום from a distance.” Genesis 22,9: “they (Avraham and Yitzchak) arrived at the מקום.” Genesis 22,14 again mentions this מקום, this time as the site named by Avraham “the Lord will see.” In Genesis 28,11 the same site is referred to as the מקום where Yaakov spent the first night on his way towards Charan. In verse 16 of that same chapter Yaakov refers to that מקום as one at which G’d’s presence is manifest. In verse 15 there he is overwhelmed and awestruck by this מקום, so that in verse 17 he erects an Altar in that מקום there and in verse 19 he names this Altar as the forerunner of “the house of G’d.” If you will bother to count, you will find that the word מקום occurs nine times, an allusion to the nine kinds of offerings which we listed earlier and which are to be offered by the Jewish people on that site, (מקום).
    When the first Temple was destroyed, this מקום was “swallowed” up by the earth [another manifestation of extra-terrestrial measurements occurring in connection with the Temple, the Holy Ark and the cherubs, as we mentioned earlier. Ed.] This is what the prophet Jeremiah referred to in Lamentations 2,9: טבעו בארץ שעריה, “its gates sunk into the earth.” If you will look at the text you will find that the letter ט in the word טבעו, “they sunk,” is written in a smaller script than the other letters. This is an allusion to the fact that the site, מקום, was swallowed up, not just the gates of the Temple. The letter ט, i.e. 9, referred also to the nine kinds of offerings which could no longer be offered on that site, מקום.
    
    7,38.אשר צוה ה' את משה בהר סיני , “which the Lord commanded Moses at Mount Sinai.” Our sages in Sotah 37 explained that all of the Torah’s commandments were commanded to Moses on Mount Sinai, both in their general outlines and in all their minute details. Here we have confirmation that the laws contained in the Book of Leviticus date back to the revelation at Mount Sinai but were repeated once more.
    According to the plain meaning of our text the reason that the Torah in our verse gives two locations, i.e. “Mount Sinai,” and “the desert of Sinai,” means that the verse has to be understood as follows: “this is the law of the burnt-offerings and the other offerings which the Lord commanded at Mount Sinai, and on that same day He instructed him to offer these sacrifices in the desert of Sinai.” The reason the location “in the desert of Sinai” was given is to ensure that we do not think that this entire legislation was given on the Mountain itself where Moses received the Ten Commandments. Another reason why the words “in the desert of Sinai” were needed as clarification is  that we should not think that this legislation was not given until after the people had started their journey away from beneath the mountain. The words בהר סיני do not mean literally “on Mount Sinai,” but “at Mount Sinai,” within sight of the mountain. It was in “the desert of Sinai,” i.e. close enough to the mountain to be considered as within the confines of the mountain itself.  This is where the Tabernacle was located (afterwards). This is what is meant in Leviticus 1,1, “He called to Moses and Hashem spoke to him from the Tent of Meeting.” At this point the Torah tells us where precisely the Tent of Meeting was located when G’d issued these instructions (at least ten months after the giving of the Ten Commandments). When the Torah (Numbers 28,6) speaks about the “daily burnt-offering prepared at Mount Sinai,” the meaning is “facing Mount Sinai,” not literally “at” or “on” Mount Sinai. No offerings were ever presented immediately on or next to Mount Sinai. (compare Nachmanides on verse 38).
   ביום צותו את בני ישראל להקריב את קרבניהם לה' במדבר סיני, “on the day He commanded the Children of Israel to offer their sacrifices to Hashem in the wilderness of Sinai.” In this verse we have clear evidence that G‘d commanded the bringing of these sacrifices. Seeing that this is so, how could Jeremiah 7,22 say: “for when I freed your fathers from the land of  Egypt, I did not speak with them or command them concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifice?”
    The fact is that G’d did most certainly command the offering of sacrifices; in fact it was one of the great acts of kindness on G’d’s part, seeing that man is flesh and blood and hence subject to sin, that G’d instituted the system of different sacrifices in order to facilitate our atonement and rehabilitation from unintentional sin. When He sees our penitence and sacrifices, G’d may reconsider His intention to punish us, etc. However, the premise underlying the legislation of sacrificial offerings is that  we should pay heed to His voice and not continue to become guilty of sins. When the prophet spoke about G’d not commanding us to bring animal sacrifices he meant that the animal sacrifices were not meant to be in lieu of penitence and proper conduct on our part. This is what Samuel had already said many hundreds of years previously to King Saul (Samuel I 15,22) “heeding My commands is much preferable than to offer Me good meat-offerings.” We have another very explicit verse on this subject in Psalms 40,7: “(You gave me to understand that) You do not desire sacrifice and meal-offering; You do not ask for burnt-offering and sin-offering.” What did G’d desire instead? (same verse) “Ears You have given me;” i.e. You made it plain that I should use my ears to heed Your words rather than to offer sacrifices. It is quite clear therefore that the sacrificial service is only a means to an end, not an end in itself. The “end” is obedience to (and love) of G’d. The sacrificial offering by the owner is acceptable only if he submits to G’d’s will. This concept is also reflected in Psalms 4,5: “so tremble and sin no more; ponder it on your bed, and sigh.” In the very next verse David writes: “offer sacrifices in righteousness and trust in the Lord.” The meaning of the entire sequence is: “ensure that you offer the kind of sacrifices that result in your not sinning again.” If someone offers a sacrifice without undertaking to heed G’d’s instructions such a sacrifice is not only not welcome but is called זבח רשעים, “a meat-offering by the wicked,” concerning which Solomon has said in Proverbs 15,8 that “the meat-offering of the wicked is an abomination to G’d, whereas the prayer of the upright is pleasing to Him.” Solomon repeats a similar message in Kohelet 4,17: ”more acceptable is obedience to G’d than the offerings of fools, for they know nothing but to do wrong.” In other words, prayer by the righteous unaccompanied by offerings is preferable to G’d to sacrifices offered by fools. 
    
    The prophet Isaiah also addresses the subject of the wicked offering animal sacrifices believing them to be an end in itself, as if they could “fool” G’d with their actions. In Isaiah 66,3 the prophet writes: “as for those who slaughter oxen and slay humans, who sacrifice sheep and immolate dogs; who present as oblation the blood of swine.....and take pleasure in their abominations;” what the prophet means is that when a wicked person such as those mentioned slaughter oxen as a sacrifice then this is equivalent to their slaying humans in the eyes of the Lord. If a wicked person sacrifices a sheep, it is no better than immolating a dog. If such an individual presents a meal-offering then this is in the same category as if he had offered swine’s blood. Both the swine and the dog are impure animals although each one of them possesses one of the two properties required for a domestic animal to be pure and hence suitable for the altar. The dog, though it does not chew the cud, has split paws (though not hooves). The swine has perfectly split hooves but also does not chew the cud. The reason the prophet used these animals as examples of offerings which are totally unacceptable is that it is the nature of the wicked to display the part of him which does correspond to the requirements of the Torah while concealing properties such as whether it chews the cud [for who can see this by merely looking at the animal?]. In essence Isaiah’s message is identical to the one mentioned by other prophets, i.e. G’d asks obedience not superficial gestures of compliance such as offering sacrifices on His Altar.
    
    8,4. ותקהל העדה אל פתח אהל מועד, “and the assembly was gathered in the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.” This required a miracle, of course This is one of several places in the Bible where a very small area was able to accommodate a very large number of people (compare Tanchuma Tzav 12.). When Moses was told to assemble all the people at the entrance of the Tabernacle, he turned to G’d saying: “how can six hundred thousand men and six hundred thousand youngsters fit into the entrance [an area of 50 by 100 cubits] of the Tabernacle? G’d replied: “is this what you are concerned about? Was not the heaven at one time no bigger than the eye of a needle and I managed to fit the entire earth through it?” G’d quoted Isaiah 40,22: “Who spread out the skies like gauze, stretched them out like a tent to dwell in?” At the revelation at Mount Sinai G’d appeared surrounded by 22,000 chariots filled with ministering angels as we know from Psalms 68,18: ‘G’d’s chariots, myriads upon myriads, thousands upon thousands, the Lord is among them as in Sinai in holiness.’ Each of these chariots was similar to the one Ezekiel saw in his vision. Seeing this was so, how could the mountain have supported all these chariots? Clearly, miracles happened which temporarily suspended the rules applying to terrestrial space. At the time G’d had told the mountain: “expand and accommodate all the loyal people.” When the Jewish people crossed the Jordan river 40 years later the entire Jewish people found space between the staves of the Holy Ark behind the Priests who marched ahead. This is based on Joshua 3,9: “Joshua said to the Children of Israel: ‘come close and listen to the words of the Lord. your G’d.’” In the future these miracles will be re-enacted when all the people ever since Adam who qualify for  resurrection will have to be accommodated on earth. Aren’t they going to complain that they do not find room to stand? However, G’d promised that at that time “I will expand the size of Jerusalem” as prophesied by Isaiah 54,2 who quotes G’d as addressing Jerusalem saying to her: “enlarge the size of your tent, extend the size of your dwelling; do not stint!” Thus far the comments of the Midrash Tanchuma Tzav 12 on the subject.
    
    8,7. ויתן עליו את הכתונת ויחגור אותו באבנט וגו', “He placed the tunic upon him and girdled him with the sash, etc.” The sequence in which the High Priest donned his priestly garments was as follows: the tunic, the girdle, the robe, the ephod, the breastplate, the turban, the Tzitz (golden headband worn on forehead). These are a total of seven in which Moses clothed Aaron. Together with the trousers which each Priest put on himself this makes eight garments worn by the High Priest when he performed the service. The order in which the seven garments were put on corresponded to the seven layers of heaven (שבעה רקיעים). The trousers which covered the Priest’s private parts corresponded to the lowest region in heaven in which the moon covers the “tent” comprising the lower world, the one described as בשגם הוא בשר, (Genesis 6,3) “while they are of flesh.” The tunic corresponded to the heaven which contained the planet כוכב, Mercury. The girdle corresponded to the heaven containing the planet נוגה, Venus. The robe corresponded to the heaven containing the planet חמה, Sun, whereas the ephod corresponded to the heaven containing the planet מאדים, Mars. The breastplate corresponded to the heaven containing the planet צדק, Jupiter. The name was an allusion to the Urim Vetumim worn inside the breastplate which helped the High Priest to establish צדק, righteousness, by consulting with G’d when he needed answers. The turban corresponded to the celestial region containing the planet שבתאי, Saturn. Seeing that Saturn is in the highest celestial region it was appropriate that the garment worn on top of the High Priest’s head should be a symbol of it. We have a verse in Job 22,12 describing Saturn as the highest planet. [I have mentioned on previous occasions that all these data and the authors of those periods finding it necessary to establish these co-relationships, are based on outdated astronomical data. Ed.]
    The ציץ, which was inscribed  with the words קודש לה', ‘holy for the Lord,” corresponded to G’d’s throne of glory which is above the seven celestial regions paraphrased by the words שבעה רקיעים, “seven layers of heaven.” The author also sees some allusion to the seven lower emanations in the seven garments listed here as worn by the High Priest. [These allusions are rather obscure. Ed.]
    8,8. ויתן אל החשן את האורים ואת התומים, “he inserted in the breastplate the Urim and Tumim.”  These “urim vetumim” were a parchment with the Ineffable Name written on it. We have explained all this in Exodus 28,30. This represented one of the various stages of the Holy Spirit. Access to G’d by means of the urim vetumim was on a lower level than that at the disposal of a prophet, but it represented a higher level of Holy Spirit than hearing a בת קול, “a heavenly echo.” You should appreciate that the difference between what is commonly known as “Holy Spirit” and “prophecy,” is that when a prophet receives a communication from G’d all his normal faculties are interrupted. At such a time he is as if deprived of all bodily functions, remaining temporarily as if a disembodied spiritual being. This phenomenon occurs while these prophets are awake (Maimonides, Yessodey Ha-Torah 5,2) and represented a special prophetic level of what is called the “eighth level.” On the other hand, the level known as רוח הקדש, “Holy Spirit,” does not involve that the recipient is deprived of his normal functions; he speaks like an ordinary individual but is imbued with a supra-natural ”antenna” which puts words in his mouths which he conveys in ordinary language. Such a person will reveal matters which will happen in the future seeing G’d put these words in his mouth. The third part of the Bible, known as Ketuvim was written under the influence of this kind of divine inspiration. The level of divine inspiration possessed by Moses was far superior to that of any of the aforementioned. His prophetic insights exceeded those of any other prophet. This is the reason why whenever our sages speak of the Bible they apply three separate names to it in the same order, i.e. תורה, נביאים, כתובים, “the Torah, the Books of the Prophets, Holy Scriptures.” Everything written in the Torah is of a superior degree of direct communication from G’d. Our sages have even stipulated that when such Books are bound separately, it is inadmissible to place the Book of the Prophets on top of the Torah, or the Book of the Holy Scriptures on top of the Book of Prophets for instance; all this to remind us of the different degrees of sanctity between these three parts of the Bible (compare Maimonides, Hilchot Sefer Torah 10,5). All of this in order for us to appreciate whence prophecy emanates.
    
    8,23. ויתן על תנוך אזן אהרן ועל בהן ידו הימנית ועל בהן רגלו הימנית, ”he placed it on the middle part of Aaron’s right ear, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.” I believe that the symbolism of these three procedures is connected to the three parts into which the universe is divided, ‘the world of the angels, the world of the planets, and the terrestrial part of the universe.’ Moses had been commanded to make the Tabernacle symbolic of these three parts of the universe. Whatever was inside (west) of the dividing curtain, פרכת, represented the world of the angels, disembodied spirits. Anything inside the Sanctuary but east of the dividing curtain represented the world of the planets (outer space in modern terms). The courtyard of the Tabernacle represented the terrestrial part of the universe. Seeing that the High Priest embodied within himself the awareness of his Creator and all these different divisions of the universe, it was important that this idea be given concrete expression in that his very body was treated as if it too consisted of three parts, each representing one part of the universe. Man himself may also be viewed as a microcosm of the universe. The three parts of man represent the world of communication by means of speech, i.e. the head, the part which corresponds to the world of the angels. The world of the “chayut,” physical, biological life, is from the chest down to the loins. This portion of man contains the heart, the source of all motion, i.e. the heart is perceived as issuing the directives which result in every move made by man. This part of man corresponds to the world of the planets, whose whole function appears to be their movements, their orbits. Finally, the lower part of man, that which may be described as representing עולם הטבע, the world of nature as we know it, begins from the loins downward and contains the reproductive organs. Seeing that the purpose of the offerings is the continued existence of the universe, (Taanit 27) a world which is divided into three parts, Moses had to give some of the blood which is the agent conferring the atonement aimed at by the animal-sacrifices, on the respective three parts of the Priest to ensure that all parts of the universe are recipients of the power of the sacrifice to bring about atonement. This is why the ear, the hand, and the foot, were chosen to represent these 3 parts of the microcosm as symbols for this atonement. The blood smeared on the ear symbolised the domain of speech in man or the world of the angels in the macrocosm. The blood smeared on the thumb of the Priest symbolised the world of motion, or the world of the planets in the macrocosm. The blood smeared on the big toe of the right foot of the Priest (Aaron) represented the area in man which needs atonement, and symbolised the terrestrial universe in the macrocosm.
    The word בהן used by the Torah to describe the thumb, is known in Tamudic Hebrew as the גודל, (compare Ketuvot 5) because It is the thickest of the five fingers. These five fingers are generally known in the Talmud by the following names: אצבע, “index finger;” (according to a view that the thumb is called זרת), אמה, middle-finger; the ring-finger is known as קמיצה as it is the last finger used in measuring the fistful of flour put on the altar in the מנחה offering. The reason the thickest finger is called זרת is because when fully extended sideways it completes the distance called זרת in the Talmud describing the distance from the extreme left point of the outstretched thumb and the corresponding point of the right by extending the little finger. [Most authorities consider the standard זרת as being approx. 28 centimeters, i.e. half a cubit. Ed.] The word גודל may be related to גדילים the fringes i.e. ציציות we are to put on four-cornered garments. The word has a connotation of: “at the extreme outside, edge.” According to Rashi, זרת is the smallest finger at the opposite end of the thumb. This finger was used to measure the measurement of the breastplate which the Torah describes as “1 זרת long and 1 זרת wide.: The reason the finger next to it is called קמיצה is that it is used to measure the קומץ of the מנחה the Priest has to place on the Altar;  the אמה is so-called as it is the longest one protruding more than any of the others. The index finger is called אצבע as it is used to sprinkle the blood on the Altar or flick it against the dividing curtain on Yom Kippur. The בהן or  גודל receives the blood. The middle finger is used as a measuring tool when measuring buildings or instruments. Thus  far Rashi on Ketuvot 5.
     Scientists have written that just as every organ in the human body has its specific function, many of them having been designed to perform multiple functions, so every one of the five fingers on the hand also has been created in order to perform a specific function. They believe that each of the five fingers has been assigned a task corresponding to one of our five senses, which between them account for most of man’s activities. The powers of the soul [invisible life-force, Ed.] are revealed by means of these five fingers. The first finger is meant to clean out the mouth, i.e. it corresponds to the sense of taste. The second one which is used in the nostrils corresponds to the sense of smell. The third one  is used to touch  things, i.e. to identify objects and people by means of the sense of touch. The fourth finger is designed to clean one’s eyes; in other words it corresponds to the sense of sight, whereas the fifth finger is designed to clean one’s ears, i.e. it corresponds to the sense of hearing. According to this theory G’d created man with five different senses and provided each of these senses with a specific outlet, i.e. one of his fingers. This is all part of the concept of the completeness of nature, i.e. a world in which everything has been assigned a specific function. We observe that each one of the five fingers performs its functions almost automatically, as if it were simply a reflex movement giving expression to the directives issuing from the respective senses. Blessed be the Lord, Creator, who has created man using so much intelligence in doing so (compare Berachot 60).
    
    8,33. כי שבעת ימים ימלא את ידכם, “for you shall be inaugurated for a period of seven days.” G’d had said something similar in Exodus 29,35 where the Torah wrote: ”for seven days you shall inaugurate them.”
    A kabbalistic approach: the days of inauguration were seven as the people already realised the significance of the seven garments of the High Priest (the trousers not being a specific garment of the High Priest). We read in Isaiah 63,12: מוליך לימין משה זרוע תפארתו, “who made His glorious arm march at the right side of Moses.” This is a reference to Moses who trained Aaron and gave him some of his prophetic powers. According to the Zohar Tzav 34,2, this is why Moses had to anoint Aaron. During these seven days Moses performed the High Priest’s duties (dressed only in a white tunic) in order to confer all this sanctity upon Aaron. Rabbi Abba said that seeing that Moses was firmly rooted in the holy place whence all this power stemmed, he was able to transfer this sanctity to Aaron. This is why the Torah wrote earlier (30,12): “he poured from the oil of anointment on Aaron’s head, and he anointed him and sanctified him.” This is also the reason that these days of inauguration were described (in the Zohar) as “days of שלמות, “days of perfection, or perfecting.” 
    
    8,34." ,כאשר עשה ביום הזה צוה ה' לעשות לכפר עליכם as he did on this day, the Lord commanded to be done to provide atonement for you.” Our sages in Yuma 2 interpreted these words to mean that the day referred to as ‘this day” was the eighth day of the consecration rites; G’d referred to the seven days the Priests had observed prior to that day. The lesson is that the procedure involving the red heifer which needs to be isolated for seven days before it is burned is derived from a similarity in the Torah’s expression (גזרה שוה) i.e. the word  צוה used both here and in Numbers 19,2. [such comparisons have halachic significance only when the word itself is not necessary in the context in which it appears. Ed.] Here the Torah (repeated) the words צוה ה', something which we knew already; in Numbers too it was clear without these words that G‘d had commanded the procedure. The additional words לכפר עליכם, “when arranging atonement for you,” refer to the Day of Atonement procedures prior to which the High Priest is to isolate himself as stated in Yuma 2. He leaves his private residence and takes up quarters in an office adjoining the Sanctuary just as he does for seven days prior to the burning of the red heifer (compare Parah 3,1 and quoted in Yuma 2). The meaning of our verse then is: “this day on which the High Priest is instrumental in obtaining atonement for the people has been preceded by seven days of isolation” (and spiritual preparation for that eighth day).
    
    8,35. ופתח אהל מועד תשבו יומם ולילה שבעת ימים, “and at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting you shall dwell for seven days.”  Moses warned the Priests not to leave the proximity of the entrance of the Tent of Meeting at the time they performed the service, i.e. until they had completed all the parts of the service which they were meant to perform at that time, i.e. on that occasion. This commandment remained in force not only during the  days of the inauguration but for all future times. This is the meaning of the verse (Leviticus 21,12) “he shall not leave the Sanctuary so that he will not desecrate the Sanctuary of his G’d.” The answer to the question of when not leaving the Sanctuary ensures that the Sanctuary will not be desecrated is: “during the time the service is in progress and has not been completed.” If the Priest were to leave the Sanctuary during this time he would commit a capital crime and would be liable to die at the hands of G’d. This is an instance where the negative commandment  which is spelled out, i.e. not to leave the holy precincts, allows for a halachically valid inference that if the party concerned does the reverse, i.e. leave the holy precincts during this time, he is guilty of death. [In practice this means that when the High Priest has become an אונן, lost a close relative who has not yet been buried, he must not leave the Sanctuary and leave the performance of the service to a substitute. Ed.]
    The meaning of the words יומם ולילה, “both by day and by night,” is not an absolute statement meaning: “around the clock.” It means that during the hours when a Priest is supposed to be on duty in the Sanctuary (or adjoining it) he must not leave these precincts regardless of whether it is night or day. Seeing that every human being sometimes has to answer calls of nature, the Priest is not only allowed to do so but commanded to do so. The Torah refers to times when there is no such call of nature which would provide a legitimate excuse for the Priest to temporarily absent himself .
    We find parallel meaning of the words “seven years” in connection with the building of Solomon’s Temple (Kings I 6,38-7,1) “He built it for seven years; and it took him thirteen years to build his palace until his whole palace was completed.” The prophet means that it took this number of years to build excluding the Sabbaths and festivals on which no work was performed. Just as these days were excluded in the prophet’s summation of how long it took to build the Temple, so here too the time out when a Priest had to answer a call of nature was excluded when the Torah spoke about “day and night.” 
    A Midrashic approach  based on (Tanchuma Shemini 1): when the Torah speaks of “and you shall remain at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting day and night,” this is a reference to the seven days of mourning for the deaths of Nadav and Avihu. While it is true that at that point in time these two sons of Aaron had not died as yet, we know that G’d Himself observed seven days of mourning for an event which had not yet occurred. This was the the reason that the Torah wrote in Genesis 7,10: “it was after the seven days, and the waters of the deluge came upon the earth.” G’d had observed seven days of mourning over the necessity that He had to destroy so much of His handiwok. In connection with that verse, the sages asked: “can one then mourn someone before he died?” If such a thing is not possible or not appropriate why did G’d mourn the event before it happened?” Man who does not know what is in store in the future cannot mourn an event which has not yet occurred. G’d who does know, is able to do so. In our instance, G’d told Aaron and his sons to observe seven days of a special nature although they were not aware of the reason. He wanted them to act as He had acted prior to the deluge. This is why the Torah wrote the words ושמרתם את משמרת ה', “you shall observe the observance observed by the Lord.” [if I understand this Midrash correctly, Nadav and Avihu sat in mourning of their own deaths prior to it having occurred. It would prove that Nadav and Avihu’s death had already been decreed prior to their taking “alien fire” into the Sanctuary, i.e. something unbidden, that this was only the occasion which determined when G’d’s decree would be carried out. Ed.] 
    
    8,36. אשר צוה ה' ביד משה, “which G’d had commanded through Moses.” According to Nachmanides the Torah in this instance did not write the usual words כאשר צוה ה' את משה, “just as the Lord had commanded Moses,” as in this instance Aaron’s sons did not do exactly as the Lord had commanded. Rather, they had done “all the things G’d had commanded through Moses,” but they added something, i.e. they introduced alien fire into the Sanctuary” (10,1).
    This whole paragraph dealing with the rites of anointing following the appointment of Aaron and his sons as Priests was told the people seven days prior to the Tabernacle being erected, seeing Moses had been commanded to erect the Tabernacle on the twenty-third of Adar. Moses spent the seven days till the first day of Nissan erecting and dismantling the Tabernacle. On the eighth day, G’d called him and commanded him the details of the sacrificial offering legislation, as from that day on the Shechinah had taken up residence in the Tabernacle between the outstretched wings of the cherubs. All the chapters from the beginning of the Book of Leviticus until here were revealed to Moses at that time. The Tabernacle was inaugurated with the seven days of מלואים offerings.
    When I wrote earlier in connection with verse 33 that the inauguration rites took seven days, it was logical that those מלואים offerings should serve as consecration offerings of the Tabernacle as they comprised the various categories of regular offerings, i.e. עולה, חטאת, שלמים. By offering these sacrifices the Tabernacle was consecrated in all its aspects. During the seven days prior to the first of Nissan in the second year, Moses performed the sacrificial service and practiced dressing Aaron and sons in the priestly garments. The purpose of all these procedures was to draw down the presence of the Shechinah to the Tabernacle. This was finally accomplished on the eighth day.
    According to the plain meaning of the text, the reason that the inaugural sacrifices comprised both burnt-offerings, sin-offerings as well as peace-offerings, was that the sin-offering was in order to obtain atonement for any desecration of the Altar that might have occurred by oversights in these various procedures. The Torah had already spelled this out in 34,15 ויקדשהו לכפר עליו, “he sanctified it (the Altar) in order to enable it to serve as a source of atonement.” The reason the Priests had to offer the burnt-offerings was in order to establish G’d’s goodwill vis-a-vis the Priests. The peace-offerings formed part of the inaugural procedures in order to express thanks to the Lord for His having given the Jewish people the means to establish close relations with Him through the presence of the Tabernacle and everything connected with it.
     When you examine what Maimonides writes in Maasseh Ha-Korbanot 2,14  you will find that when the Temple of the future will be inaugurated similar inaugural procedures will take place when the Altar will be consecrated. In fact, according to Moed Katan 9, these rites will override the Sabbath and those offerings will be offered on the Altar also on the Sabbath. All of this is spelled out in Ezekiel 46,4. May the Lord grant us that we see the fulfillment of all these promises including the rebuilding of the Holy Temple soon in our days. May Isaiah’s prophecy (Isaiah 60,7) “all the flocks of Kedar shall be assembled for you, the rams of Nebaioth shall serve your needs; they shall be welcome offerings on My Altar, and I will add glory to My glorious House,” be fulfilled speedily.
    
    
    
    
   ויהי ביום  השמיני
   
   
   חכמות בנתה ביתה חצבה עמודיה שבעה. טבחה טבחה מסכה יינה אף ערכה שלחנה. שלחה נערותיה תקרא, על גפי מרמי קרת., “Wisdom has built her house, when she has hewn seven pillars. She has slaughtered the meat, mixed her wine; she has also set her table. She has sent out her maids, she cries out from the highest places in the town.” (Proverbs 9,1-3). 
   In these verses Solomon draws a comparison between our faith and that of the idolaters. He compares our faith to a wise woman, whereas he compares the idolaters to a foolish woman (verse 4 and onward). The words חכמות בנתה ביתה, are a reference to the wisdom contained in the Torah. The reason that the word appears in the plural is to remind us that all manner of wisdom extant are contained in the Torah. This is why he describes the house built by such a woman (faith) as based on seven different pillars. The number seven is a simile for "many pillars.” Any structure built on numerous pillars, foundations, is bound to endure.
     The number “seven” is not to be considered as literally seven, just as in Proverbs 24,16 the word “seven” in the line: “for the righteous will rise even if he falls seven times,” is not to be taken literally. The wise woman endeavours to prepare the food herself, mix the wine herself, and set the table herself instead of relying on others to do all this for her. This is implied in the words אף ערכה, i.e. she also does this herself. The wise woman, i.e. the Torah, also calls out to the women of her age, the foolish ones, trying to convince them that our faith is the only one which has substance. [this is the meaning of “she sends out her maids” Ed.] The paragraph is a parable describing the perfection of Torah in all its aspects, the Torah of which it is written לא תחסר כל בו, “it does not lack anything at all” (Deut. 8,9).Torah is a guide for the individual leading him to His Creator. Anyone who immerses himself in Torah thoroughly will find answers to all its detractors, i.e. to people who believe in the Trinity (the Catholics) or those who believe in other power-sharing by G’d and other deities. When he has studied Torah thoroughly he will feel that the table is set for him and all the food and drink has been served ready to eat. Torah can fill the needs of the mind of the foolish just as food and drink can serve the needs of our stomachs. This is what David had in mind when he wrote in Psalms 19,8 “The teaching of the Lord is perfect, renewing life; the decrees of the Lord are enduring, making the simple wise.”
    Solomon warns all people to preoccupy themselves with Torah and to abandon their previous foolish pursuits. This is the meaning of  Proverbs 9,4: ”Who is a fool let him enter here; to the person who is devoid of sense she says.” What does Torah (the wise woman) have to say to such people devoid of sense? “Come and eat my bread, drink the wine which I have mixed, Forsake foolishness and live!, Walk in the way of understanding.” As a result (verse 11) “your days  will be multiplied; you will experience added years of life.”
    Solomon compares the belief in idolatry to a foolish woman who offers the kind of advice which makes the multitude stumble and fall; she strengthens those who indulge in a sinful life style; she praises the foolish practices perpetrated by the sinners, the wicked deeds performed by them. This is the meaning of Proverbs 9,13-14: “a foolish woman makes a lot of noise, she is full of foolishness, knows nothing. For she sits at the entrance of her house or on a chair in the highest place in town.” The meaning of this verse is that the woman described here is the reverse of the one described in verses 3-4 of the same chapter.
    The meaning of the verse is that the woman mentioned made herself the foremost, the highest in rank. Normally, the highest ranking position is accorded to wisdom; in this instance the woman occupying pride of place is a foolish woman. The truly foremost woman, the one mentioned in verses 3-4 built her house with wisdom, while preparing everything in her household she kept silent. The foolish woman, who is unable to do what the wise woman has done, substitutes for her failure with noise. This is the meaning of the words: “she does not know anything.” To the degree that the woman in verses 3-4 is accomplished with all degrees of perfections, the one mentioned in verses 13-14 is without any of these accomplishments. All she knows how to do is “sit in the entrance of her house.” This expression is a simile for the way such a woman, i.e. philosophy, is unproductive and a waste of time. The “woman” sitting perennially at the entrance to her house indicates by her conduct that there is nothing worthwhile inside her house. The idolaters are in a similar position. Although totally devoid of accomplishments they can point to,  they are unwilling to enter the shadow of G’d’s House, or the protection of his wings, preferring to remain on the “outside.”
    Rabbi Joshua ben Chananyah answered the Roman Emperor in a similar vein  when he said to him that whereas he and his colleagues were at liberty to worship any philosophy they desired, they would forever remain outside the fold, (Judaism) even if they wanted to. Our verse points out the audacity of idolaters who, though not able to boast of any true accomplishments, boast of the efficacy of their faith, extolling their evil deeds. This is what Solomon meant here with the words  על כסא מרומי  קרת, as opposed to על גפי מרומי קרת in verse 3. The difference is that the maids of the wise woman call to people warning them not to enter the  house of the foolish woman, the foolish woman by way of contrast praises “the sweetness of stolen waters, and the tastiness of bread eaten in secret” (verse 17 there). This is an example of how the foolish woman (philosophy) entices her followers to become enmeshed in further sin. The former woman gives advice which results in added years of life, whereas the foolish woman’s advice hastens the onset of decay and death. (compare verse 18 at the end of that chapter).
    A Midrashic approach to the verses in question: The words “she built her house with multiple wisdom” refer to the Torah which was the blueprint with which all the various worlds were built. The words חצבה עמודיה שבעה, mean that the world is hewn out of seven heavens, רקיעים. If man accumulates merits by busying himself with Torah he will inherit seven different “earths.” If not, he will be expelled from seven earths, i.e. worlds. The expression שבעה ארצות, “seven earths,” refers to our terrestrial world which consists of seven regions each with a different climate. Promising us “seven earths” is equivalent to promising us that we will inherit this earth, whereas the people ignoring Torah are told that they will lose their life in the hereafter, the region of seven heavens.
    This Midrash (Midrash Mishley chapter 9) interpreted the word שבעה, “seven,” which Solomon mentioned in verse one literally. The reason is that the number seven has equal significance in the celestial regions and the terrestrial regions. There are many commandments in the Torah where the number “seven” plays a significant role. The Sabbath is the seventh day; the Jubilee year is the conclusion of seven cycles of seven years, שמטה. Both the festival of Passover and Tabernacles consist of seven days. The components of the four species of plants used on the festival of Sukkot total seven, (1 lulav, 1 etrog, 2 willow-branches, and 3 branches of the myrtle). We observe a period of seven days of mourning for close relatives who have died; we observe seven days of celebration when a couple get married. The common denominator of all these commandments or practices involving the number seven is that they somehow symbolise the seven days in which G’d created and completed the universe. Even a Gentile prophet such as Bileam built seven altars for G’d before embarking on his nefarious scheme of cursing the Jewish people (which was thwarted by G’d). He told G’d specifically that he had erected seven altars (Numbers 23,4). It is not surprising therefore that there were seven days of inauguration for the Tabernacle. G’d Himself referred to them as such (Leviticus 8,33). The spiritual origin of these rites involving the number seven is one and the same.
    If Aaron did not get consecrated on the seventh day itself but only on the morrow, the eighth day, this was because of the special nature of performing service in the Sanctuary of the Lord. Seeing G’d is essentially “One,” this is symbolised by the fact that Aaron did not commence his duties until the “first” day after the seven days of his consecration, i.e. the day of the “One.”
    
    9,1. ויהי ביום השמיני קרא משה לאהרן ולבניו ולזקני ישראל , “It was on the eighth day; Moses called  upon Aaron, his sons, and the elders of Israel.”  The reason that the office of the High Priest began functioning on the eighth day was due to yet another cause in addition to what we have mentioned. We observe that in connection with the Tabernacle and the Temple the number eight plays a very significant role. The High Priest wore eight garments. The number of fragrances consisting of anointing oil, and incense was eight. The anointing oil contained four such fragrances, i.e. מר, קנמון, קנה, קדה,, (Exodus 30,23-24) whereas there were four additional fragrances which made up the incense. They were נטף, שחלת, חלבנה, לבונה (30,34). The number of staves used to carry the furnishings of the Tabernacle also amounted to eight; 2 each for the Holy Ark, 2 for the golden Altar, 2 for the table, and two  for transporting the copper Altar. Animals which were basically fit as sacrifices on the Altar had to be at least eight days old  (Leviticus 22,27). The musical instruments used when the Levites sang the daily hymn during the service numbered eight as we know from Psalms 4,1 and others.
    In this instance the eighth day was the first day of Nissan, a day when the Tabernacle was not only erected but remained standing. The day was distinguished with “ten crowns” in the language of our sages (Rashi). In other words, it was distinguished, honoured in ten different ways. 1) It was the beginning of the second year since the Exodus. 2) It was the first day on which Aaron functioned as High Priest. 3) It was the first day on which sacrifices were offered in the Tabernacle. 4) It was the first time the people of Israel received the priestly blessings. 5) It was the first day on which heavenly fire descended onto the copper altar. 6) It was the first time the male goat of the New Moon offering was ever offered. 7) It was the first time that animals which had been slaughtered without previously having been designated as a sacrifice were no longer permitted to be eaten. 8) It was the first day when the Shechinah took up residence on earth. 9) It was the first of the twelve days on which the princes offered their respective offerings. Nachshon ben Aminadav, prince of the tribe of Yehudah, was the first to offer same. 10) It was the first day on which people who had contracted certain types of ritual impurity had to leave the camp, i.e. a testimony to the sanctity of the encampment of the whole people.
    We find a similar description in Torat Kohanim describing the day as “taking” ten crowns, i.e.  it was first in order of the creation [there are two views as to whether the world was created (completed) on the first of Tishrey or the first of Nissan; this is the latter view. Ed.]. It was the first day of the offerings by the princes; the first day when the institution of the Priesthood began to function; the first day that service on the Altar in the Tabernacle was performed; the first day on which heavenly fire descended; the first day when sacrificial meat could be eaten; [incompatible with the view that Yitro arrived before then. Ed.] the first of the first of the months. It was the first day on which the Shechinah rested over the Jewish people on a permanent basis. It was the first day on which the Israelites received the priestly blessings.
    A Midrashic approach to the words: “it was on the eighth day” (based on Tanchuma Shemini 2) David says in Psalms 75,5: אמרתי להוללים אל תהולו, “I said to the frivolous men: ‘do not be frivolous!’” Instead of reading אל תהולו, read אל תחולו, “do not break out in dance.” The reason is that true joy does not linger with man in this world but only in the world to come. Many people who rejoice and are happy today may find that on the morrow they have no such cause for happiness and exuberance. This is why Solomon, [using the same expression as David, מהולל, Ed.] said: (Kohelet 2,2) לשחוק אמרתי מהולל, “of revelry I said: ‘it is mad!’” If you require proof of the truth of both statements take a look at what happened at the creation. When G’d completed His handiwork at the end of 6 days and He reviewed it (Genesis 1,31) He was very pleased  as we know from Psalms 104,31: “may the glory of the Lord endure forever, may the Lord rejoice in His works!” In the verse from Genesis we are told that “G’d looked at His entire handiwork and behold, it was very good!” Only a few chapters later (Genesis 6,6) the Torah reports וינחם ה' כי עשה את האדם בארץ ויתעצב אל לבו, “Hashem had to comfort Himself that He had made man on earth, and it caused Him sadness in His heart.” Keeping this verse in mind, Assaph said in Psalms 75,5 not to indulge in frivolous merriment. If even G’d’s joy did not endure, how much less is the chance that man’s joy on earth will endure! 
    Avraham progressed in his life and became exceedingly great and wealthy killing the most powerful kings on earth in the process. In his old age G’d gave him a son from Sarah. His joy was unbounded. A few years later G’d commanded him to take his son and to offer him up as a sacrifice. Even after having mastered that trial and being commended by G’d (Genesis 22,16-17), he went back from Moriah and had to bury his beloved wife Sarah. His joy had been short-lived. He even had trouble being given a suitable plot where to bury Sarah. In the end, he was literally fleeced, having to pay an astronomical sum of 400 shekel for a hole in the ground.
    Yitzchak  who enjoyed phenomenal success in Gerar, seeing his investment returned one hundred-fold, (Genesis 26,12) faced expulsion shortly thereafter as the Philistines became jealous of his wealth. His joy had been very short-lived. After Avimelech realised that he had wronged him and apologised and made a treaty with him (Genesis 26,28) and he surely thought that “he had it made,” we read that his eyesight failed him and that he almost made a fatal error bestowing the blessing on a son whom he had considered worthy but who in the event had been unworthy all along. His joy had proven to be short-lived. If a Yitzchak who had been a living example of what it means to be a “total-offering, i.e. burnt-offering,” was not allowed permanent joy on earth, i.e. the fruits of his total dedication to G’d’s command, how much less may we ordinary mortals expect joy on earth to be enduring.
    Yaakov experienced great joy when he had the dream with the ladder, seeing angels ascending and descending, a promise from G’d that He would be with him, etc. (Genesis 28, 12-13). Not long afterwards he experienced a whole string of misfortunes, beginning with being tricked out of his chosen wife Rachel, the rape of Dinah, and concluding with the disappearance of Joseph. If Yaakov the righteous, of whom G’d had said that He would boast of such a man (Isaiah 49,3), could not hold on to his joy in this life, what can we lesser individuals expect in the way of enduring joy on earth?
    Joshua experienced great joy in his time, he settled the Jewish people on their land, killed 31 Kings, was promised by G’d that no one would rise against him successfully, and enjoyed unchallenged authority by his people (compare Joshua 1,18) but died without leaving behind any children. Surely, this must have dimmed his joy on earth. If this was his lot, how much less joy can the righteous in our time expect to enjoy while on earth! The High Priest Eli who did have sons had to experience the loss of the Holy Ark, the curse on his children who had disgraced him. When he died at a ripe old age the  immediate cause  of his death was the news that both his sons had been killed in battle (compare Samuel I 1,9; 1,10). If this happened to a righteous person such as the High Priest Eli, what sort of joy can there be in store in this world for the wicked?
    Consider the fact that on this day, Elisheva, daughter of Aminadav experienced greater joy than any man or woman before her. She saw her husband begin his career as High Priest; Her brother-in-law, Moses, became king of Israel. Two of her sons became deputy High Priests. Her brother Nachshon became the first of the princes to be honoured with bringing the sacrifices by laymen. Even she did not long remain in such a blissful state of joy seeing that two of her sons, Nadav and Avihu, died on the very same day at the hands of G’d. Considering all these examples we need not be surprised at Solomon’s warning not to be frivolous, not to dance with joy, as such joy is apt to be all too brief.
   קרא משה לאהרן ולבניו, “Moses called out to Aaron and his sons.” Our sages (Tanchuma Shemini 3) comment that the word קרא ל.. means that Moses called upon Aaron to wear the mantle of the position of High Priest. When told that he was to be the High Priest, Aaron said to his brother: “seeing you have worked tirelessly to make the Tabernacle a reality, it does not seem fair that I should be the High Priest.” Moses answered him that although Aaron had been appointed to this position by G’d, He, Moses, was as happy for him as if he himself had been appointed to that position. He added that just as Aaron had rejoiced at the time when Moses was appointed the leader of the people, although he was the older of the two, now it was his turn to rejoice in Aaron’s promotion. The occasion when Aaron had rejoiced at Moses’ appointment is recorded in Exodus 4,14 where G’d told Moses that his brother Aaron would rejoice in his appointment. One of the reasons Moses had not wanted to accept the position was that he was afraid that Aaron who had been the people’s spokesman up until then would be offended. This is what Moses had meant when he said to G’d: “appoint (send) the one whom You are in the habit of sending on such missions” (Exodus 4,13).
    Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai said that the heart which had been able to sincerely rejoice at the promotion of his younger brother was the most suitable one to wear the urim vetumim, as is written “he shall carry the judgment of the Children of Israel on his heart” (Exodus 25,30). This is why during the seven days that Moses performed the sprinkling of the blood on the Altar, offering incense, etc., G’d said to him: “Moses in case you think that you are going to be the High Priest, call in Aaron and appoint him to the position.” Why did Moses also have to call in the elders of the people? G’d told him to appoint Aaron in their presence in order that later on no one could claim that Aaron had appointed himself to this position.
    
    9,2. ויאמר אל אהרן: קח לך עגל בן בקר לחטאת, “He said to Aaron: “take yourself a young bull for a sin-offering, etc.” This was intended to atone for the affair of the golden calf, of which the Torah had written that Aaron had made it (Exodus 32,35). 
    A Midrashic approach to these words (Tanchuma Shemini 4): “the reason Moses diod not simply say: “take a bull,” but “take yourself a calf, etc,.” is  to remind him that whereas on account of the golden calf  he had almost lost his claim to the position of the High Priesthood, he now would re-establish his claim to it by offering a calf as sin-offering.
    9,3. קחו שעיר עזים לחטאת ועגל וכבש בני שנה תמימה לעולה, “take a he-goat for a sin-offering and a calf as well as an unblemished  sheep in its first year for a burnt-offering.” In Sifra Shemini 3 the question is posed why the Israelites had to offer more sacrifices than Aaron, i.e. both a he-goat, a calf and a sheep. The answer given is that the Israelites had sinned with a he-goat when they had drenched Joseph’s coat in its blood at the time; now they had been guilty of committing a sin using a calf. It was appropriate therefore that they receive expiation for both of these sins. Each of these two sin-offerings was to atone for the sin committed with its counterpart.
    I believe that the fact that the calf offered by the people was a burnt-offering whereas Aaron’s calf was a sin-offering was to demonstrate that although Aaron had committed the sin of the golden calf with his hands, his heart had not had any part in the sin at all. This is why the calf could be his sin-offering. [I believe the author tries to explain why the principle of אין קטגור נעשה סנגור, “that the prosecutor cannot change his garments and suddenly appear in the guise of the counsel for defense,” has not been violated here, as the sin-offering was of a technical nature only. Ed.]
    Furthermore, the author believes that the very words: “which Aaron had made,” referring to the golden calf Aaron had made, are superfluous, and are to be read as limiting Aaron’s guilt, i.e. though he had “made” it, he had had no emotional or intellectual part in that whole episode. The Torah had described how Aaron had made the calf in Exodus 32,4, so there was certainly no need to tell us in 32,35 that he had made it. Aaron had to bring the calf as a sin--offering precisely because the sin-offering atones for a deed not for a thought. The Israelites, on the other hand, whose sin had consisted of their sinful thoughts connected to the golden calf had to offer it as a burnt-offering, to atone for their thoughts. [The Israelites who had sinned in deed on that occasion had long since been executed or died at the hand of G’d. Ed.] Those who had been guilty of auxiliary deeds required the sin-offering to atone for that part of their sin.
    9,4. ושור ואיל לשלמים, “and an ox and a ram as peace-offering.” Our sages in Torat Kohanim Sifra Shemini 4 comment on this: “why did the Israelites have to bring two animals, i.e. a calf as well as a fully grown bull?” The answer is that the Torah had described what came out of the crucible into which Aaron threw the gold both as “calf” and as “bull,” on separate occasions. In Exodus 32,8 it was described as a calf, whereas in Psalms 106,20 it was described as a bull when David said: “they exchanged their glory for the image of a bull that feeds on grass.” It was appropriate then that the bull would atone for a deed that was as animal-like as that of a bull, whereas the calf was to expiate for a deed comparable to that of a calf. The proof that G’d was willing to relate to the people again with His goodwill is found in the words לזבוח לפני ה' “to slaughter in the presence of the Lord,” meaning that the (symbol of) sin the people were afraid of had already been slaughtered in the presence of the Lord. We would have expected the Torah to write that these animals be slaughtered as “peace-offerings,” rather than as “in the presence of the Lord.” Moreover, atonement is accomplished through the sprinkling of blood not through slaughtering, a merely preparatory act. According to Torat Kohanim then these words indicated that the very act of slaughtering these animals already resulted in atonement for the people on that occasion.
   כי היום ה' נראה אליכם, “for this day the Lord has appeared to you.” Actually Moses should have said “nireh” with the vowel segol under the letter aleph instead of the vowel kametz that we find here. [Seeing that the word refers to Hashem, who is certainly masculine]. The variation in the regular use of the vowel may be an allusion to the feminine attribute of Justice which would also manifest itself on that day killing Nadav and Avihu. We find something parallel to this in Psalms 130,3 אם עונות תשמר י-ה אדוני, מי יעמוד?, “if You G’d were to keep account of sins, O G’d, who will survive?” The name used for G’d is the attribute of Justice. In our chapter we encounter a verse (23) describing the manifestation of G’d  which is described as כבוד ה', an attribute below that of the tetragram without moderating adjective. 
    
    9,7. קרב אל המזבח, “approach the Altar!” According to the plain meaning of the text these words mean that Aaron is to approach the northern side of the Altar, the area where the slaughtering of the animals took place.
    According to a view in the Midrash Sifra Shemini Miluim 8, the Altar appeared to Aaron as looking similar to the shape of a bull and he was afraid of approaching it. Moses approached him saying to him that he should not be afraid but should approach it without worry. This is why we find these instructions here which we do not find anywhere else.
    According to Nachmanides we must not misunderstand this Midrash as meaning that Aaron saw (a non-existent) figure of a bull on the Altar. The Midrash means that the only sin which Aaron had been guilty of was the making of the golden calf (bull). This is why the sin was constantly in his thoughts. It was just like when David said in Psalms 51,5 concerning his own sin: “my sin is constantly present in my mind.” Aaron looked at the Altar as if it were the personification of his sin, reminding him of it even more visibly. He was afraid that such thoughts would interfere with his ability to offer sacrifices from here on in. This is why Moses had to put his mind at rest telling him that he did not have anything to worry about as his part in that sin had already been forgiven.
   וכפר בעדך ובעד העם, ועשה את קרבנך ואת קרבן העם, “and make atonement for yourself and for the people, and prepare your offering and that on behalf of the people.” The sequence of the words may mean that Aaron was first to initiate atonement for his own sin before bringing about atonement for the people, or it might mean  that the words “and for the people,” are a reference to his immediate family, i.e. the members of the house of Levi. In that event the words קרבן העם, “the offering for the people,” would refer to the people at large.
    
    9,9. ואת הדם יצק אל יסוד המזבח, “and he poured the blood upon the foundation of the Altar.” He did this in order to achieve atonement for man whose existence is dependent on blood. This is the meaning of Leviticus 17,14: “for the life-force of all flesh resides within its blood.” It is also written (Leviticus 17,11) “for he atones for the blood which resides in the נפש, ‘life-force.’” This then was the reason that the High Priest was burning up the following three items, “the fat parts, the kidneys, and the tissue attached to the liver.” All of these parts of man had to partake in order for the sin to be carried out (golden calf) and they were instrumental in turning the people away from the path of goodness to the path of evil. This is the deeper meaning of “and the fat-parts, the kidneys and the tissue adjoining the liver of the animal which was the sin-offering he made go up in smoke on the Altar” (verse 10). The part called חלב is the fat which causes man to become gross, arrogant; it is responsible for man’s inherent pride and arrogance. Moses alluded to this when he said (Deuteronomy 32,15) “Yeshurun grew fat and kicked, you became fat and gross and coarse;” we also have a verse in Job 15,27 depicting something similar: ”his face is covered with fat and his loins with blubber.” [the speaker refers to a king rebelling against the Lord. Ed.]
    The kidneys are the source of what is called עצה, “counsel,” in the language of our sages (Berachot 61); they base this on Psalms 26,2 “ונסני צרופה כליותי ולבי, “and try me, test my heart and kidneys (mind).” Another verse (Psalms 16,7) carries a similar message, i.e. אף לילות יסרוני כליותי, “my kidneys (conscience) admonish me at night.”
    The reason the tissue adjoining the liver had to be burned up is that desire, carnal and other kinds of greed which permeate man, have their origin in that region of the body. It is also the region which is the (physical) cause of anger and rage. All the negative virtues in man are connected to the liver. All of these parts the Priest burned up in the northern part of the Altar as the north is the region from where all evil originates, (compare Jeremiah 1,14). In other words, evil is consigned back to where it originated (symbolically speaking). All these procedures have one purpose, to achieve atonement for man’s sins which originate in the fatness of his heart and the planning of his ego which originates in the liver.
    
    9,22. וישא אהרן את ידיו אל העם ויברכם, “Aaron raised his hands in the direction of the people and he blessed them.” The meaning of the words אל העם, normally translated as “in the direction of the people,” should here be translated as: “for the sake of the people, i.e. to meet their needs.” The commentators who disagree with us and dress themselves up in fancy garments to lend weight to their words, are wrong when they said that the meaning of these words is that Aaron lifted his hand in order to indicate to the people that they should raise their right hand as affirmation. These commentators [Christian theologians, compare St. James version of the Bible, Ed.] quote (glossaries of Maymoniut on Maimonides Hilchot Tefillah 14,3)  that the word ידו with the vowels of the plural, is spelled without the letter י indicating that it is really a singular, i.e. “his hand.” Our answer to them is simply that traditionally we read the word as if it had been spelled with the letter י, i.e. that Aaron raised both his hands. Their argument that Aaron only raised his right hand is null and void. The reason that we encounter this unusual spelling is to indicate that the right hand is more important than the left hand concerning mystical matters which are revealed only to select individuals. This is why the Kabbalists have said that the word is spelled ידו in the singular to allude to the select individuals who are recipients of deeper insights from the “right” side of G’d. In this way justice is done both to the spelling and the traditional reading. When you compare the prayer Moses uttered  when he prayed for the victory of the Israelites against the attack by Amalek in Exodus 17,11 you will also find this dual spelling of the word ידו, i.e. והיה כאשר ירים משה ידו וגבר ישראל. “Whenever Moses raised his hand (s) Israel would prevail.” In the following two verses the word is spelled as ידיו in the normal way. Had Moses used only one hand at a time, it is hard to understand why he needed two men to support his hands as is evident from verses 12 and 13 in that chapter.
    If the people who understood our verse as Aaron raising his hands towards the people (instead of towards G’d) would be correct, the Torah should have written instead of וישא אהרן את ידיו אל העם, the formula וישלח אהרן את ידיו אל העם. It is the custom for a father who prepares to bless his son to put his hand on his head, just as Yaakov did when he prepared to bless the two sons of Joseph. In that instance the Torah wrote וישלח ישראל את ימינו, “Israel extended his right hand.” In our verse the Torah employs the verb וישא to show that Aaron’s hands were stretched upwards (towards heaven). We have a parallel example in Kings I 8, 54-55 ויהי ככלות שלמה להתפלל אל ה' את כל התפלה והתחנה הזאת וכפיו פרושות השמים ויעמוד ויברך את כל קהל ישראל, “it was when Solomon had completed this entire prayer and entreaty with his palms outstretched heavenwards, he stood and blessed the entire congregation of Israel.” It is clear that the meaning of the verse is that Solomon’s hands were in an upright position aimed towards heaven.
    
    9,23. ויבא משה ואהרן אל אהל מועד ויצאו ויברכו את העם, “Moses and Aaron entered the Tent of Meeting, and when they came out they blessed the people.” They both had to enter to enable Moses to teach Aaron the details of the incense offering. Aaron had not been allowed to enter beyond the entrance of the Tabernacle during the seven days of inauguration as we have read in 8,38 that Aaron and his sons were to remain at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting during this entire period. Now, on the eighth day, permission had been given for him to enter. Moses accompanied him in order to teach him the procedure. Moses had already acquired expertise in this procedure having performed it for the last seven days. You know that Moses had performed all the various procedures connected with the service in the Tabernacle from 8,19-21 “Moses sprinkled the blood, Moses slaughtered. Moses cut up the animal into pieces, he burned up the ram, etc. etc.” Up until the eighth day Moses had performed all these procedures. This is why Psalms 99,6 describes both Moses and Aaron as “His Priests.”
    When the Torah describes both Moses and Aaron as emerging from the Tabernacle and blessing the people, this means that they did so immediately after having offered up the incense. The reason is that at that moment  prayer is accepted by G’d with a minimum of delay. It became the custom for the High Priest on the Day of Atonement to offer the incense and even to leave his pan inside the Temple in order to immediately leave the Sanctuary and offer his (famous) prayer for the economic welfare of the Jewish people in the coming year; at the same time he requested from G’d that all the various needs of the Jewish people be met (Yuma 53). This is also what prompted David to say in Psalms 141,2: ”Take my prayer as an offering of incense, my upraised hands as an evening sacrifice.” David singled out the incense offering by name from amongst all the others, because it is the most beloved. Hence prayer offered at the time of day when the incense would be offered is most effective.
    
    9,24. ותצא אש מלפני ה' ותאכל על המזבח את העולה, “Fire emanated from heaven and consumed the burnt-offering on the Altar, etc.” Now, on the eighth day of the Tabernacle being inaugurated with various animal sacrifices all of which had been offered in order to atone for the sin of the golden calf, heavenly fire descended to accept these offerings. This fire remained a constant phenomenon until the generation of Solomon when he built the Holy Temple. (Zevachim 61). In fact it did not cease until that Temple was destroyed. According to our tradition King Menashe had extinguished it personally (about 100 years prior to the destruction of the Temple). We find an allusion to this in Leviticus 6,6: “the fire on the Altar will remain constant, it shall not be extinguished.”
    We find that during various times in our history there have been twelve recorded occasions when fire descended from heaven (to accomplish a specific task). Six of these occasions were for the sake of accepting sacrificial offerings; the other six occasions were demonstrations of Divine displeasure and anger. The first of these twelve occasions was the instance recorded here, where the fire which descended indicated G’d’s pleasure and acceptance of the sacrifices offered. The second such occasion occurred in the days of Gideon who had asked for a sign from the angel that he had not fantasised but that G’d really wanted him to become the leader of the nation in order deliver the people from the yoke of Midian. The wording there (Judges 6,17-18) is: ”If I have gained your favour, give me a sign that it is You who are speaking to me; do not leave this place until I come back to You and bring out my offering and place it before You.” He answered: “I will stay until you return.” In verse 21 of that chapter we read that Gideon’s offering was consumed by supernatural fire. Seeing that the angel had requested that Gideon perform five tasks, Gideon in turn requested a sign to be certain in his heart that the matter would come true. The angel had requested (Judges 6,25) that Gideon take the ox belonging to his father  (and destroy it) as well as “a second” seven-year old bull and offer it as a sacrifice to G’d after he had first torn down the altar of the Baal which belonged to Gideon’s father. He asked him to cut down a sacred post, to build an altar for the Lord, on level ground on top of this stronghold. He was to take the other bull and offer it 
as a burnt-offering on that newly erected altar. The meaning of the word “second” when the prophet spoke about a second seven year old bull was the “second of the womb of its mother.” The angel went on to say to Gideon: “destroy the altar of the Baal  belonging to your father as well as the sacred post which is upon it you shall cut down.” He then instructed him to build an altar for the Lord on a fortified place on a specified site on that fortress and to offer a burnt-offering consisting of this second bull, using the wood from the sacred post as firewood. The expression מעוז which we translated as “a fortified place,” refers to a protruding rock and was supposed to symbolise the Azzazel. Seeing that these instructions sounded very strange, Gideon requested a sign from G’d that this was indeed what G’d wanted. The fire which consumed his offering on that altar was that sign.
    The third time we find heavenly fire as demonstrating G’d’s approval,  was when Manoach had offered a thanksgiving offering after his wife and he had been told that they would have a son who was to be raised as a Nazir and who would begin to redeem the Israelites fom the stranglehold exerted on them by the Philistines. [Israel only defeated the Philistines finally in the days of Chizkiyahu, Kings II 18,8, some 400 years after Shimshon. Ed.]  We are told in Judges 13,16 that the angel told Manoach that there was no point in delaying him as he would not eat from the gift Manoach had in mind to prepare. He told him to prepare an offering to the Lord instead. When Manoach did so and the smoke from the  flame and fat rose heavenward, the angel rose to heaven within that flame. According to Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon, Manoach had first (verse 19) referred to the slab of stone where he prepared the offering as צור, “a rock.” When he observed what happened he suddenly called this rock “altar,” (verse 20). Once there was evidence that their offering had been accepted by G’d, Manoach knew that the prophecy would be fulfilled.
    The fourth time heavenly fire represented G’d’s pleasure occurred in the time of David after pestilence had struck the people (as a punishment for the head count) and David purchased the threshing-ground of Arona the Jebusite as the site for the Temple to be. We are told in Chronicles I 21,26 that “David built there an altar to the Lord and he sacrificed burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. He invoked the Lord who answered him with fire from heaven on the altar of burnt offerings. Thereupon the Lord ordered the angel to “return his sword to his sheath” (the pestilence would cease). 
    The fifth occurrence of heavenly fire signaling G’d’s approval occurred in the days of King Solomon when the Temple had been completed. When Solomon had completed the inaugural prayer and had blessed the people, heavenly fire descended on the altar and consumed the offering, and the attribute of כבוד filled the Sanctuary (Chronicles II 7,1). If you were to ask why there was a need for this demonstration and renewal of heavenly fire seeing that we said previously that it continued unceasingly ever since the inauguration of the Tabernacle in our chapter, the answer is simply that Moses’ copper altar was far too small to accommodate all the offerings presented by Solomon on that occasion (compare Zevachim 59). As a result, the Priests were forced to utilise the entire courtyard and convert it into a temporary altar (compare Kings I 8,64). It was forbidden to introduce alien fire into the courtyard as it would be classified as “alien fire.” It was also forbidden to take from the fire on the altar and use it to burn the meat and fat of the offerings in the courtyard. Transferring such fire from a site of intense sanctity to one of lesser sanctity runs counter to the general principle מעלין בקודש ואין מורידין, “one may add to levels of sanctity but not diminish it.” As a result of these problems there was a need for heavenly fire to become manifest in that courtyard for Solomon and the people to know that what they had done had met with G’d’s approval.
    The sixth time heavenly fire descended to demonstrate G’d’s approval was on Mount Carmel when Elijah had his famous confrontation with the prophets and priests of the Baal (Kings I 18,38) Elijah pleaded with G’d to respond to what he had undertaken without consulting G’d. This is why he had to plead twice, saying  ענני ה' ענני, “answer me O Lord, answer me!” G’d responded positively in stages. The first response was when heavenly fire consumed Elijah’s offerings as well as the moat of water surrounding it. The second response by G’d was the rain which materialised seemingly out of nowhere, just as Elijah had predicted (verse 44-46). Rabbi Ami (Berachot 9), commenting on the repeated words ענני, claims that Elijah asked for two responses. He wanted a demonstration of heavenly fire which should consume the prophets of the Baal together with the offerings. His second request was that the people watching should not consider what was going to happen as a form of witchcraft.
    Now to the six occasions when heavenly fire represented signs of G’d’s anger or displeasure. The first such instance occurred here when Nadav and Avihu were killed by heavenly fire as we read in 10,2. The second incident occurred in Numbers 11,1 when the Israelites complained for no apparent reason. The destructive fire on that occasion stopped only in response to Moses’ prayer. The third instance occurred during the uprising of Korach and Datan and Aviram. We are told in Numbers 16,35 that “fire came forth from the Lord and consumed the 250 men who had offered incense” which had been rejected. The fourth such incident is reported in Job 1,16 where heavenly fire falling down and killing boys and sheep is mentioned. Both the fifth and sixth incidents occurred in connection with Elijah who called down such fire to burn the detachment of a captain and 50 soldiers whose task it was to capture him (Kings II 1,10 and 10,12). The reason that these people were punished was the arrogance they displayed vis-a-vis the accredited prophet of G’d. [The third detachment was spared as the captain related to Elijah with deference. Ed.]
    10,1. ויתנו בהן אש וישימו עליה קטורת, “they put fire in them (the censers) and placed incense in them.” According to the plain meaning of the text Nadav and Avihu’s sin consisted in that they introduced alien, i.e. man-made, fire into the sacred precincts. The regulations pertaining to the incense offering required that the fire be taken from the Altar and that the incense be burned up by that fire. The Torah had spelled this out in Leviticus 16,12: ”he shall take a shovelful of fiery coals from atop the Altar that is before Hashem.” Nadav and Avihu thought that the actual fire from the Altar was required to totally consume the animal sacrifices. This was a sin as they demonstrated a lack of faith, not trusting G’d to make heavenly fire descend on the sacrifices and able to consume the sacrifices; this is why they brought additional fire to consume the incense.  By bringing their own fire they made the miracle of heavenly fire descending seem less relevant, thereby causing a desecration of the name of the Lord in the eyes of all those who had observed what they did. This is why their punishment fitted their sin, as that same heavenly fire they did not trust to materialise consumed their own insides. This is the explanation of Rabbi Aderet (ראב'ד) of what happened .
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Acharey Mot 6). They entered the Sanctuary while in a state of intoxication. This accounts for the fact that the Torah spells out the prohibition of priests entering the Sanctuary while drunk immediately after having reported this incident (compare 10,8-11). The Sifra Shemini Miluim 22-23 writes as follows: “G’d said to them: ‘I have honoured you more than you honoured Me. You introduced impure fire into My holy Place, whereas I will burn you  with pure, heavenly fire.’” How exactly did they die? Two threads of fire came out of the Holy of Holies and entered their nostrils becoming divided into four “threads.” Two entered the nostrils of Nadav and the other two entered the nostrils of Avihu.’”
    A kabbalistic approach: We can gain a clearer picture of the sin of these sons of Aaron when noting that the Torah wrote: וישימו עליה, instead of writing וישימו עליהם, “they placed on it” instead of: “they placed on them.” [there had been two censers, each brother having entered with his own censer. Ed.] When you compare what the Torah writes in connection with the 250 men who offered incense (Numbers 16,18) you will find that the fire and incense is described with the words “they placed it on them, (the censers, plural). When the instructions as to the correct procedure is issued in the Torah (Numbers 16,17) Moses had told these men ונתתם עליהם קטורת “place on them incense.” (No mention had been made of fire although the 250 men added their own fire) The word עליה as distinct from עליהם is an allusion to the attribute of Justice. The Torah is trying to give us an insight into the thinking of Nadav and Avihu at that time. They knew that incense was intended to counter, to stop the attribute of Justice in its tracks, as we know from Moses in Deuteronomy 33,10: “they place incense to placate Your anger.” The word קטורת itself means התקשרות רוח במדות, “establishing a spiritual affinity.” The Aramaic translation of the word ותקשור, (Genesis 38,25) “she tied” is וקטרת. The spiritual affinity established by means of the incense is meant to draw down an abundance of heavenly  blessings by means of the attribute of Justice, which in turn will confer these blessings on the person burning up the incense. The sin of the person offering incense with such considerations consists in the fact that it is not permissible to direct one’s offering to any other attribute of G’d than the tetragram, i.e. Hashem. Seeing that Nadav and Avihu erred in the address to which the offered their incense, we do not find it described as אשה ריח ניחוח לה', “as a fire-offering of pleasing fragrance to the Lord,” but the very attribute of Justice to whom they addressed their offering smote them. This is the meaning of the words ותצא אש מלפני ה' ותאכל אותם, “fire came forth from the presence of the Lord and consumed them so that they died” (verse 2).
    Most of the commentators claim that Nadav and Avihu brought their incense into the Holy of Holies. As proof for their opinion they offer what is written in Leviticus 16,2 that even Aaron must not enter the Holy of Holies on any day other than the Day of Atonement on pain of death. The only occasion on which the High Priest is allowed to enter the Holy of Holies, equipped with incense, is the Day of Atonement. The warning of the death penalty there is linked to the death of the two sons of Aaron, suggesting that this is precisely what they had been guilty of. This is also the opinion of Rashi. Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra (on Leviticus 16,1) agrees. However, Nachmanides (Leviticus 16,2) does not believe that Nadav and Avihu entered the Holy of Holies but that they only entered the outer Sanctuary. He finds it impossible to believe that these sons would be arrogant enough to enter holy precincts which even their father and Moses had not entered. Why should they offer their own incense in a place holier than where their father had offered his own? The Torah mentions specifically that Aaron presented his incense in the Sanctuary; (compare 9,23: “Moses and Aaron entered the Tent of Meeting).” The expression ויבא in that verse refers to the preparation and offering of the incense.
    
    10,2. ותצא אש מלפני ה' ותאכל אותם וימותו לפני ה', “Fire came forth from the presence of the Lord and consumed them, and they died in the presence of the Lord.” Seeing that they had sinned by abusing fire, they were punished by fire. The kind of death described here by the words “in the presence of the Lord” means that their body and soul underwent a “surgical” separation, the fire entering their bodies through their nostrils separating soul from body. We must be careful not to understand the verse as saying that their souls were burned, i.e. that they lost their claim to the hereafter. If that were so the words בקרובי אקדש, “by those very close to Me I become sanctified,” which Moses told Aaron in G’d’s name, would not make any sense. Why should the souls of people G’d describes as close to Him be destroyed, burned?
    In reference to verse 3 our sages (Tanchuma Shemini 1) quote Moses as saying to his brother Aaron: “I knew all along that the Sanctuary would be sanctified (that someone prominent would die), but I thought it would be either I or you. Now I know that Nadav and Avihu are greater than either you or I, as G’d has chosen them to sanctify His name.” No doubt such statements are not made concerning people who have lost their claim to the hereafter. There cannot be any doubt that their very death was the atonement for their sin, that they were elevated to the celestial regions immediately and that this is the reason the story of their death is repeated in connection with the atonement rites described in Acharey Mot (Leviticus chapter 16).
    In the Jerusalem Talmud Yuma 1,1 the question is raised why the death of Nadav and Avihu is mentioned in connection with Yom Kippur, seeing their deaths occurred on the first of Nissan? The answer given is that the (premature) death of the righteous acts as atonement for the people left alive.
    Just as it is wrong to understand the “burning” of these sons of Aaron literally as far as their souls are concerned, so it is wrong to understand the word as referring to the burning of their bodies or even their clothing. After all, the Torah writes (verse 5) that “they carried them (out of the Sanctuary) in their tunics.” Each of these sons of Aaron had his individual tunic as we know from Exodus 28,40. The text refers to their death as “burning,” as we  know from verse 6 where the Children of Israel as a whole are commanded to weep “for the conflagration which had befallen, which the Lord had ignited.” It would appear that this wording is the source for our sages (Sanhedrin 52) stating that one of the four death penalties, called שרפה, burning, is to consist of the victim having molten lead poured down his throat. As a result of this procedure the victim’s windpipe and gullet would be burned and his soul would  leave his body. There is no law in the Torah which decrees that someone’s body be burned. The only example of anyone dying by what is described as “burning,” are the sons of Aaron and their bodies clearly were not burned.
    The army of Sancheriv which perished on a Passover night (185,000 of them) also died in the same manner as did Nadav and Avihu as we have been told in Sanhedrin 94. The prophet Isaiah 9,4 had predicted  this when he said: כי כל סאון סואן ברעש ושמלה מגוללת בדמים והיתה לשרפה מאכולת אש, the meaning of this verse is that whereas in all other wars and battles victory and defeat are earmarked by deafening noise and the soldiers uniforms are tainted with blood, in the case of Sancheriv the soldiers of his army will suffer burning, being devoured, not like soldiers in other battles. Kings II 19,35 reports that on that night (anniversary of the Exodus) “an angel of the Lord went out and struck down 185,000 of the Assyrian camp and the following morning they were all dead corpses.” The plague which struck the Assyrian army was the result of the combined prayers of King Chizkiyahu and the prophet Isaiah as reported in Chronicles II, 32,20-21: “Then King Chizkiyahu and the prophet Isaiah, son of Amoz, prayed about this, and cried out to heaven. The Lord sent an angel who annihilated every mighty warrior, commander, and officer in the army of the King of Assyria, and he returned in disgrace to his land. He entered the house of his god, and there some of his own offspring struck him down with the sword.”
    Seeing that the deaths of the sons of Aaron consisted of their souls being “burned,” on the inside, their bodies and clothing remained intact. This is why the prophet Isaiah 10,16 in describing heavenly fire when predicting the downfall of Assyria uses the word יקוד several times in describing that fire, i.e. it is not fire in the physical sense as we understand it, but it is like the fire that killed Nadav and Avihu, leaving no outward trace. The words תחת כבודו in that verse mean that the כבוד of a person, i.e. his clothing which lends him a measure of dignity will be untouched as the “fire” operates beneath the clothing and the body, even. The Talmud (Sanhedrin quotes Rabbi Yochanan as referring to his clothing by the description כבודי, “my honour, my dignity.” Concer-ning the phenomenon we have just described Isaiah said in verse 18 of the chapter quoted וכבוד יערו וכרמלו, “it will burn its great army which looks like a forest wiping it out body and soul, so that it will remain like something that has been eaten by worms.” The simile of the worm was used by the prophet to describe something destroyed from the inside though until the last moment none of that destructive process had been visible on the outside. The woodworm leaves the bark of the tree untouched providing no warning of what goes on inside the trunk. The word סס occurs also in connection with the moth devouring woolen garments. The word was borrowed in this verse of Isaiah to describe a silent process unnoticed by outsiders. This entire army of the Assyrians was composed of descendants of Japhet, second son of Noach who had enjoyed the protective merit that their clothing was saved as their ancestor had been a party to his brother Shem when he covered the nude body of his father by walking into the tent backwards (Genesis 9,23). His brother Shem, who initiated that move and whose descendants we are, merited the commandment of wearing ציצית on our garments (compare Tanchuma Noach 13).
    The word אותם at the end of our verse which is spelled with the letter ו in this instance, is an allusion to the “sixth fire of the Shechinah.” We are told in Yuma 21 that there are a total of six different categories of heavenly fire. They are: “a fire which eats” but does not “drink;’ fire which “drinks” but does not “eat;” fire which both “eats and drinks; fire which consumes both dry and wet material;” fire which supplants another category of fire; fire which consumes another category of fire. The fire which “eats but does not drink,” is the fire of which the Torah says that it descended on the altar and consumed the meat of the offerings. Fire which “drinks” but does not eat is fever, which dries out a person at the same time killing his appetite. Fire which eats and drinks was the fire that consumed both Elijah’s sacrifice and the water in the moat he had made around it. The fire which consumed both wet and dry matters was that on the woodpile of the altar which was not extinguished by rain. Fire which supplanted competing fire is the fire of the angel Gavriel  which descended into the kiln where Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah had been thrown by Nebuchadnezzar. The latter had stoked the kiln for seven consecutive days (Daniel 3). The angel used “fire” to cool man-made fire. Fire which consumes fire is the fire of the Shechinah. The Midrash tells of G’d burning angels who had opposed Him when He wanted to create man. The letter ו in the word אותם, may also allude to the six sins which our sages claim that Nadav and Avihu were guilty of and which combined to cause their deaths.
    
    10,3. הוא אשר דבר ה' לאמור בקרובי אקדש, “this is what the Lord had said, saying: ‘I will be sanctified by those nearest Me.’” Where had G’d ever made such a statement that Moses could now refer to it? The first time was in Exodus 19,22 at the time of the revelation at Mount Sinai, where G’d had warned the Priests not to look too much at supernatural phenomena. The Torah had written: “even the Priests who approach Hashem should sanctify themselves lest Hashem will burst forth against them.” [the expression יתקדשו used in this verse always implies imposing restrictions upon oneself. Ed.] This was a warning that the Priests are at greater risk than ordinary Israelites because they are in a preferred  position, being closer to Hashem. The expression יפרוץ בהם, “He might burst forth against them,” describes precisely what happened to Nadav and Avihu who were killed immediately they committed this sin. The words used in Exodus 19,22 are that the Priests are coming close to Hashem, i.e. הנגשים אל ה', whereas in Leviticus 16,2 the word used by the Torah is בקרבתם לפני ה', “when they approached the presence of the Lord.” Proof that both expressions are more or less identical is found in Jeremiah 30,21 where the prophet uses both expressions in one breath, saying: והקרבתיו ונגש אלי, “I will bring him near that he may approach Me.”
    The second time G’d indicated that He would be sanctified by those closest to Him was in Exodus 29,43 (compare Rashi) where the Torah writes (quoting G’d) ונועדתי שמה לבני ישראל ונקדש בכבודי, “and there I will meet with the Israelites, and it shall be sanctified by My glory.” The word ונקדש in that verse is an allusion to what would happen, i.e. a revelation of G’d’s Shechinah to the sons of Aaron. The word לכבודי is a further reference to what Moses told Aaron his brother that G’d had said ועל פני כל העם אכבד, “and I shall be glorified in the presence of the whole nation,” at the end of our verse. The expression בקרובי, “through those close to Me,” in the plural, hints at a variety of matters which could trigger such a sanctification of the Lord’s name. However, seeing that the Torah does not have vowels, it is possible to read this word as a singular i.e. be-kirbi, seeing the word has been spelled without the letter ו which is common to the spelling of the word karov, קרוב. The word would then be a reference to an angel (attribute) attached, within Hashem. We would then have an even more literal allusion in the words quoted from Exodus 29,43 ונקדש בכבודי, meaning  ונקדש בקרבי,”I will be sanctified by means of this attribute (angel) within Me.” Similar constructions are found in Hoseah 11,9 בקרבך קדוש, “the Holy One in your midst.” Another similar expression is found in Deuteronomy 31,17 where the people suffering a lot of disasters blame the fact that אין אלו-הי בקרבי, “that it demonstrates that my G’d is not near me” (not “within” me). In that case also, Israel, instead of addressing itself to the essence of G’d, i.e. Hashem, addressed itself to a lesser attribute of G‘d, i.e. the attribute of Justice.” Failure to address one’s prayers or offerings to Hashem, the tetragram, results in retribution by the very attribute of Justice to which one addresses oneself (compare what we wrote on verse 1 under the heading “a kabbalistic approach”).
   וידום אהרן, “Aaron remained silent.” Silence is one of the ways in which mourning is expressed; the various ways in which mourning is to be expressed have been spelled out by Ezekiel 24,16-17: “O mortal man, I am about to take away the delight of your eyes from you through pestilence; but you shall not lament or weep or let your tears flow. Moan, softly; observe no mourning for the dead. Put on your turban and put your sandals on your feet; do not cover your upper lip, and do not eat the bread of the comforters.” During the next few verses the death of Ezekiel’s wife is reported. From verse 21-22 G’d continues His instructions to the prophet saying: “Tell the house of Israel: ‘thus said the Lord, G’d: I am going to desecrate My Sanctuary, your pride and glory, the delight of your eyes and the desire of your heart; .....and you shall do as I have done. You shall not cover your upper lips or eat the bread of comforters, and your turbans shall remain on your head and your sandals on your feet. And Ezekiel shall be become a portent for you.’”
    Ezekiel had been prophesying the forthcoming destruction of Jerusalem, the destruction of the Temple, and the exile of the population to the lands of their enemies so that they would not have time to observe the normal rites of mourning. The prohibition of things a mourner must not do mentioned in that chapter comprises five items: 1) washing oneself, 2) anointing one’s skin with oil or other lotions; 3) sexual intercourse, 4) attending to one’s business, 5) study of Torah. Anyone of the aforementioned activities comes under the heading of שמחה, an activity which causes joy. Seeing that joy is the opposite of mourning, it stands to reason that these items are forbidden to people observing mourning. Attending to business and the study of Torah are lumped together in a single verse when David said in Psalms 119,162: שש אנכי על אמרתך כמוצא שלל רב, “I rejoice over Your words as one who has found a great spoil.” This proves that both pursuits are described as resulting in joy. Isaiah 9,2 also makes it plain that joy, גילה, is associated with the acquisition of spoils.
    
    10,4. בני עזיאל דוד אהרן, “the sons of Uzziel, the uncle of Aaron.” Rashi explains that Uzziel had been a brother of Amram as it is written (Exodus 6,18) “and the sons of Kehat were: “Amram, Yitzhar, Chevron, and Uzziel.” Seeing that this is spelled out in the written Torah, what did Rashi contribute with his commentary? Rashi concentrates on the words “an uncle of Aaron” in our verse. Seeing that we were aware of this genealogy we also knew that Uzziel was an uncle of Aaron. Why then did the Torah provide this well-known information? The reason the Torah added these words was to teach us that the uncle and nephew were alike not only in their hereditary genes but in their acquired characteristics, their מדות טובות. Just as Aaron was known as a lover of peace and harmony, so his uncle before him had been known for these qualities.
    
    10,6. ועל כל העדה יקצוף, “and He will be angry at the entire community.” It is not reasonable to understand these words to mean that G’d will punish the entire Jewish people for a sin committed by the Priests or an  individual Priest. G’d does not punish one nation for the sins of another, and the Priests are considered as a separate nation in this respect. Even if the Israelites were to do the very thing that the Priests are forbidden to do, i.e. leave their heads unshorn or their clothing rent, this would not be accounted a sin for them at all as the whole legislation applies only to the Priests.
    However, G’d’s anger and wrath would apply to the Israelites if, when they are commanded to observe mourning and to weep for the death of the sons of Aaron, they fail to do so. (compare Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon). The word יקצוף does not mean “He will be angry,” but “there will be קצף,” i.e. there will be a manifestation of that anger. We find a similar construction in Samuel II 2,32: ויאור להם בחברון, “day broke upon them in Chevron” (after marching all night). The word ויאור in that verse does not mean “He made it light for them.” We find that “the Children of Israel mourned the death of Aaron for thirty days, the entire nation,” (Numbers 20,29). When Moses died (Deut. 34,8) we also find that “the Children of Israel mourned for him for thirty days in the wilderness of Moav.” Here too, mourning for the deaths of Nadav and Avihu was mandatory and this directive is couched in the words “and your brethren  the entire House of Israel shall bewail the conflagration.” We know from Exodus 24,1 that Nadav and Avihu were members of the elite of the people, unsurpassed by any of the elders except Moses and Aaron. This is why G’d mentioned them by name before the elders -who obviously were senior to them in age- before mentioning the elders (without naming the latter). In fact, the mourning rites for these two sons of Aaron exceeded the mourning for Aaron and Moses as Moses himself had described them as their brethren (Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon). [Moses and Aaron were mourned as leaders, not as close family members such as brothers. Ed.].
    
    10,9. יין ושכר אל תשת, “do not drink wine or intoxicating liquids!”  Sifra Shemini 1,2 writes that if the Torah had not added the word שכר I would have understood the prohibition as applying only to the drinking of wine, not to the consumption of other liquids causing drunkenness. If the word שכר includes all intoxicating liquids, why did the Torah have to single out “wine?”  Drunkenness due to consumption of wine is punishable by death; intoxication with other liquids, while forbidden, is not punishable by death at the hands of heaven.
   אתה ובניך אתך בבואכם, “you and your sons with you, when you enter, etc.” The reason the Torah mentions the word “when you enter,” is that it refers to the times when the Priests in question are on duty. The Priests were divided into 24 groups each group performing the service in the Temple for one week at a time in rotation. The prohibition not to drink wine or intoxicating drink applied only during the week that this particular Priest could be called upon to perform service in the Temple. The reason the Torah added the wordאתך , “with you,” is to say “the ones like you,” i.e. the ones fit for priestly duties. Had the Torah not added this word but had written only אתה ובניך, “you and your sons,” the meaning would have been that all of Aaron’s sons or for that matter all of any sons of Priests regardless of whether he suffered from a physical blemish which made him ineligible to perform Temple Service, would still not be allowed to drink intoxicating drinks. If a Priest had married a woman of a category forbidden to him he would have been disqualified from performing service in the Temple. During the time he remained married to such a woman no restriction would apply to him concerning the consumption of wine and liquor. We find a clear indication of this in Leviticus 21,1 where the Torah introduces the legislation of whom a priest may marry and whom not. Instead of writing אמור אל בני אהרן, “speak to the sons of Aaron,” the Torah writes: אמור אל הכהנים בני אהרן, “say to the Priests who are the sons of Aaron.” The difference is that only people who fit the description כהנים are subject to the legislation applicable to Priests. He who has forfeited the privileges associated with being described as כהן, is not subject to some of the restrictions imposed on the Priests.
    When the Torah adds in our verse חקת עולם לדורותיכם, “an eternal statute for your generations,” this does not mean that this legislation is in force at a time when no priest can fulfill his priestly function due to the absence of a Temple. It means that during the various periods when the Tabernacle moved from one location to another, such as Gilgal, Nov, Shiloh, Givon, this legislation would remain in force and would continue in force once the permanent Temple would be built. 
    Seeing that the Torah adds the words ולהבדיל בין הקדש ובין החול, בין הטהור ובין הטמא, ולהורות את בני ישראל וגו', “and to distinguish between the sacred and the profane and between the pure and the impure; and to teach the Children of Israel, etc.” (verses 10-11) the letter ו before להורות is an indication that those who have to make such decisions have to apply to themselves similar restrictions to the Priests who serve in the Temple. It is incumbent upon the people who have to make these various rulings mentioned here, i.e. the judges to abstain from alcoholic drink before performing their duties; this is also alluded to in the extra letter ו at the beginning of verse 11 in the word ולהורות “and to give instruction, to make rulings.” It is well known that drinking wine induces three phenomena, sleep, grossness of the spirit and a confused mind. If one falls victim to even a single one of these phenomena one cannot perform one’s duty as a judge or expert in Torah rulings.
    Our Parshah actually contains allusions to all three of these phenomena. The fact that drinking wine induces sleep is such a well known phenomenon that it does not need to be proven by examples; the alcohol in the wine rises to the brain in the form of moist and warm vapour. This in turn induces sleep; hence the words “when you enter the Tent of Meeting” are also a warning not to go to sleep inside the holy precincts, especially within the Sanctuary. This is why Yaakov was so upset when he awoke after his dream with the ladder, exclaiming: “how dreadful! This must be the gateway to heaven and I was unaware of it” (Genesis 28,16). Yaakov clearly implied that had he been aware of the sanctity of the site, he would never have gone to sleep in that place. He would not even have lain down there. This is also the meaning of Samuel I 3,3 ונר אלו-הים טרם יכבה ושמואל שוכב בהיכל ה'. The meaning of this line is: “Samuel lay down to sleep before the light went out in the Sanctuary.“ [the author means that this verse most certainly does not mean that Samuel lay down to sleep in the Sanctuary before the lamp went out.] If proof were needed for our interpretation it is found in the separating tone-sign etnachta under the word שוכב.
    It is also not appropriate to sit down in the Sanctuary. The Priest is to perform all procedures standing up. We know this from Deuteronomy 18,7:ושרת  בשם ה' אלוהיו ככל אחיו הלוים העומדים  שם לפני ה'; “he is to minister in the name of Hashem, his G’d, like all his brethren the Levites who stand there in the presence of the Lord.” The word לעמוד לשרת in verse 5 of that same chapter in Deuteronomy further underlines the fact that the Priests had to be standing when performing service in the Temple.
    The fact that drinking wine results in grossness of spirit is due to the heating up of the powers residing in the heart which results in grossness. This is alluded to when the Torah refers to the need to distinguish between the sacred and the profane. When one is in a state of spiritual grossness one does not consider that some things are holy whereas others are not but treats all of them as being on a comparable spiritual level, making no distinctions.
    The fact that drinking wine may result in one’s mind becoming confused is because the vapours or fumes generated by the wine rise to the brain. They create a barrier between the area where the independent intelligence is located and the area activating other bodily functions. The comparable example would be clouds in the sky forming a barrier between the light of the sun and our terrestrial world. Just as the surface of the earth is darkened by the failure of the rays of the sun to break through the clouds, so the power of the intelligence is prevented from making itself felt when blocked by the vapour or fumes created by the wine one has drunk.
    When the Torah speaks about the Priests having the task to instruct  the Children of Israel in the statutes, etc., these words were added because such instructions presuppose that the instructor is of sound mind at the time he lectures. Drinking wine might interfere with that.
    Solomon roundly condemned the intake of too much wine as he wrote in Proverbs 23,31: “do not look at wine because it is red.” Our sages explain Solomon’s warning there to mean that too much wine results in one’s inhibitions becoming loosened, one’s libido becoming aroused (compare Vayikra Rabbah 12,1 [the reading of the words כי יתאדם would be emended to כי יתאוה דם, it arouses the libido in one’s blood. Ed.].
    The balance of the verse we quoted from Proverbs concludes with Solomon saying כי יתן בכוס עינו יתהלך במישרים, “when he (only) looks at the cup he will walk upright,” are understood as follows: the word עינו is similar in meaning to the word עין in עין הבדולח, “like the colour of crystal” (compare Numbers 12,7 where the Torah describes the appearance of the manna). The word for cup, כוס, in that verse is spelled כיס, “pocket,” instead of in the usual way. Solomon may hint that he who is seduced by the attractive looking cup of wine will experience financial loss because of the folly which the wine-intake will lead to. The matter is not unlike the seduction of Chavah by the serpent who also relied on the exterior eye appeal of the fruit of the tree of knowledge. It induced overpowering curiosity in Chavah to taste that fruit. The Torah had described the tree as “good to eat, a desire-arousing phenomenon for the eyes, and lovely as a source of enlightenment” (Genesis 3,6). As a result, It brought death in its wake. Similarly, wine, though alluring at first both in appearance and taste eventually causes the death of those who indulge. Our sages (Tanchuma Shemini 5) state that “just as the earth was cursed on account of the serpent, seeing that the Torah writes; (Genesis 3,17) “the earth is cursed because of you,” so a third of the earth was cursed on account of wine as the Torah writes: “Noach awoke from his sleep” (Genesis 9,24), followed by “cursed be Canaan,” [Noach’s first grandson from his third son (Genesis 9,25)].
    
    10,12. וידבר משה אל אהרן ואל אלעזר ואל איתמר בניו הנותרים, “Moses spoke to Aaron, to Eleazar and Ittamar his surviving sons;”  Seeing that we already had a similar line in verse 6 of our chapter, why did the Torah not report what Moses said on this occasion immediately following verse 6? The reason that the Torah interposed the legislation about not entering the Sanctuary while in a state of intoxication was to teach that it is good form to offer one’s condolences to the bereaved. Aaron was a mourner; the Torah therefore displays its manner of comforting him in his bereavement, by speaking to him exclusively about rites to be observed by mourners. He was not to drink wine while in mourning. This is why in verse 29 only Aaron is addressed. The idea that G’d personally observes such good form has already been demonstrated in Genesis 18, where G’d appeared to Avraham in order to fulfill the custom of visiting the sick, seeing Avraham was recuperating from his circumcision at the time.
    Our sages, who have taught us to emulate characteristics observed in the way G’d acts (Sifri end of Eykev), derive the law that one is to visit the sick and comfort the bereaved from these verses. If G’d Himself went to the trouble to observe these customs, we must emulate Him and not consider it below our dignity. The same applies to the commandment to bury the dead. G’d had buried Moses, (Deut. 34,6). If G’d Himself takes the trouble to bury a mortal, how much more must mortals bury their peers! Such considerations prompted Solomon to write in Kohelet 7,j2: “it is better to go to the house of a mourner than to go to the house where a feast is in progress.” What Solomon meant is that it is preferable to be in the company of people who are concerned both with the living and the dead than to keep the company of people who are only concerned with the living. [By visiting the mourners one pays his respects both to the departed and to those surviving him. Ed.] G’d conveyed the thought that we are to learn from Him, Who had temporarily interrupted sharing the joy of His children on the occasion of the inauguration of the Tabernacle and had comforted Aaron instead, displaying His sorrow that Nadav and Avihu had had to die. Our sages (Sotah 14) find yet another source proving that G’d comforts the mourners, quoting Genesis 25,11 “It was after the death of Avraham that G’d blessed his son Yitzchak.” According to the understanding of the Talmud the “blessing” described there was the comfort expressed to the bereaved over their loss, in that instance over Yitzchak having lost his father.
   ואכלוה מצות אצל המזבח, “and eat it unleavened near the Altar.”  the Torah also writes  ואכלתם אותה במקום קדוש, “you are to eat it in a sacred place.” These words mean that the meal-offering of which the Torah speaks may be eaten anywhere in the courtyard of the Tabernacle/Temple. In order that we should not interpret the words “near the Altar” too literally, the Torah added the words: “in a sacred place.” The entire courtyard of the Tabernacle is sacred. In that event, what do the words “near the Altar” contribute? The Torah wishes to tell us that the closer to the actual Altar the Priest stands when eating his share of the meal-offering the better (Zevachim 61).
    
    10,14. תאכלו במקום טהור אתה ובניך ובנותיך אתך, “you shall eat it in a ritually pure place, you, your sons, and your daughters with you.” The reason the Torah did not write that these parts of the offerings have to be consumed in a “sacred” place is that women are also entitled to eat them and they were not allowed to enter the courtyard of the Tabernacle, (compare Kidushin 52). [The Talmud there speaks of the עזרה adjacent to the Temple, an area similar in its degree of sanctity to the courtyard of the Tabernacle. Ed.] 
    
    11,2. זאת החיה אשר תאכלו מכל הבהמה אשר על הארץ, “these are the creatures which you may eat from among all the animals on earth:” If you will take a good look at this paragraph and at the paragraphs following them, you will realise that there is an overall pattern to the sequence in which they have been written. They correspond to the four basic elements of the universe which we explained in connection with Genesis 1,2. Here the Torah proceeds in an ascending manner. You are aware that in Genesis they appeared in a descending manner. The four basic materials of terrestrial earth are: fire, wind (atmosphere), water, earth. This is also the order in which Solomon arranged these four basic components of our terrestrial universe in Proverbs 30,4. He writes: “Who has ascended heaven and come down? Who has gathered up the wind in the hollows of his hand? Who has wrapped the waters in his garment? Who has established all the extremities of the earth?” In the paragraphs before us the order of these phenomena and allusions to them has been reversed, so that their identifying symbol instead of being ארמ'ע has been reversed to become עמר'א. Here the Torah commenced with the element earth, dust, when it wrote: “these are the creatures on earth that you may eat.” In the second paragraph the Torah speaks of the element water, telling us what creatures in the water we are allowed to eat. In the third paragraph the Torah speaks about the atmosphere, telling us which birds (categories) must not be eaten. The Torah tells us which birds or winged creatures we must abhor (11,13). In the fourth paragraph the Torah alludes to the element fire which is the fourth element, the least substantive of all. The paragraph (11,29) begins with the words: “these are the contaminated ones, (ritually impure) among the teeming animals that teem upon the earth.” Among the categories listed is the צב which consists of two groups including the salamander. it is alluded to in the word למינהו, “according to their kinds,” an expression not found with the other seven of these contaminated creatures. According to an ancient tradition this salamander has its origin in fire; it is the product of a furnace which has been heated for seven years consecutively both by day and by night. This enabled the salamander (dragon?) to mature during all this time. If it were to separate from the fire even for a moment it would die, just as fish die when they are removed from their element, i.e. water. [our author bases himself on the Sifra of Talmudic times. Tossaphot Chagigah 27, speak of such creatures which we think of as strictly belonging to mythology, Ed.] When Rabbi Akiva came to the verse והצב למינהו (verse 29), he exclaimed: “how great and marvelous are Your works o Lord, You have created them all with wisdom; You created huge monsters in the sea, huge animals on land, If the ones in the sea would be placed on land they would die at once, whereas if the huge land animals like elephants were to be placed in the sea they would drown at once. You created great creatures with fire and large creatures in the atmosphere. If the ones which thrive on fire would be placed in the atmosphere they would die immediately, whereas if the ones whose habitat is the atmosphere were to be put to the fire they would burn to death immediately. This then was what David had in mind in Psalms 104,24 when he wrote the words quoted above”  (compare Sifra Shemini 8,7).
    I believe that there is a common denominator between the creatures of the atmosphere and those of the element fire, seeing that in introducing them the Torah used the expression אלה, “these,” and  ואלה, “and these,” respectively (compare 11,13 and 11,31). The very word אלה has a spiritual connotation as it is the singular of the word אלה-ים. The last two letters in the word אלהים are simply plural ending. What the Torah alludes to by using the word אלה in connection with the creatures whose habitat is the atmosphere or fire is that both these two elements are devoid of substance, not really tangible. This is the reason that they appear so often  in connection with the word אלהים. The idea is that the less tangible something is the closer it is to celestial domains rather than terrestrial domains. The word אלה occurred when the people who asked the Israelites to worship the golden calf said: אלה אלוהיך ישראל,”these” are your gods o Israel, a call to idolatry. You are no doubt familiar with certain nations who worship fire and wind respectively. They do so because they realise the lack of physical substance of both of these elements. By serving them they hope to benefit by increased success and good fortune.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Shemini 6 or Vayikra Rabbah 13,2). The words זאת החיה אשר תאכלו, “this is the category of creature that you may eat,” reflect Chabakuk 3,6: ”when He stands He makes the earth shake, when He glances, He makes nations tremble.” At the time when G’d was about to give the Torah to the Jewish people, He stood and contended with  the earth and gave the Torah to Israel in public, in full view of everyone. At that time He lifted the restrictions against spilling the blood of the seven Canaanite nations inhabiting the land of Israel. We have several verses to that effect, one in Isaiah 60,12 “for the nation that does not serve you shall perish;” a reference to the lives of those seven nations. We have another verse in Deuteronomy 20,16: “you shall not let live anyone;” the repetition  of such permission in Isaiah means that also the money, physical possessions of those nations, was permitted to be kept as loot. This is supported also by the words “you shall consume  all the (7) (seven) nations” (Deut. 7,16).
    Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai says that the meaning of the verse in Chabakuk 3,6 is that G’d spied out amongst all those nations, searching for a country which would be suitable as a homeland for the Jewish people, a mountain suitable to give them the Torah, etc., and that He found none other than the land of these seven nations. Rabbi Hunna from Tzippori understood the word וימודד in that verse to mean that G’d (allegorically speaking) loosened their girdles, i.e. much as in Job 12,8 which is the reverse of חגור מתניכם, “tighten your belt ready for war or marching.” Rabbi Tanchum, son Chanilai said that the meaning of those words is that He let loose against them all the forbidden creepers. According to Vayikra Rabbah 13,2 this is a simile comparing the situation to a farmer who came to a threshing ground with a donkey on one side and a dog on the other. He loaded the donkey with five measures of grain and the dog with two. The donkey trotted along contentedly whereas the dog was clearly resentful. So the farmer took one of the measures of grain from the dog and added it to the load the donkey was carrying. Whereas the donkey did not protest the dog was still resentful. The farmer told the dog that it was not much good to him seeing it was unwilling to accept any responsibility (the seven Noachide laws) at all. Similarly the Gentile nations and the Jewish people. Seeing that the former do not even observe the basic seven Noachide laws G’d does not have much use for them and has permitted the Israelites to dispossess them completely. [in the version in the Midrash the restrictive word “seven” is absent. It appears that our author was careful not to offend the Christians in his host country. Ed.] 
    Another parable illustrating the relationship between G’d and the Jewish people.  A physician went to see two of his patients. To the family of the one who was in a life-and death-situation he did not prescribe a specific diet for the patient, permitting him to eat whatever he wanted. To the second patient he gave very precise instructions what not to eat as this was apt to save his life. After a while the patient to whom the doctor had not prescribed a specific diet died whereas the other patient recovered. The families of both patients became aware that the doctor had prescribed only for the one patient and they wanted to know why. The doctor explained that the patient who died had been doomed already. There was therefore no point in denying him what he could enjoy on a short-term basis. The same applies to the Israelites and the seven Gentile nations who are doomed. Seeing that the latter are headed for death anyway, there is not much point in prescribing a restrictive diet. The Israelites, however, may be saved from their sickness if they keep a strict diet. Hence the Torah issued the instructions in this chapter, while allowing the Gentiles to eat whatever they want. This is the mystical dimension of introducing this chapter with the words זאת החיה, this is the life-giving legislation regarding food which may be consumed, etc.” Seeing that the Israelites are attached to eternal life, it is important hat they not consume food which could endanger their hereafter.
    
    11,4-7. את הגמל...ואת השפן...ואת הארנבת...ואת החזיר. “the camel...and the hare...and the swine..etc.” Unless the mammals in question possess two distinct features, i.e. split hooves and chewing the cud they are not permitted to be eaten by the Israelites The fact that the list of forbidden mammals does not include the horse and the donkey is simply due to the fact that they do not even have a single one of these two distinguishing marks. The Torah singles out only such animals by name which possess at least one of the two mentioned. When the Torah mentions the pig, the dog is automatically included, seeing that dog has a cleft paw (if not hoof). We also find that Isaiah 66,3 lumps the pig and the dog together as being of a similar category when he says of the people who offer both as sacrifices to the Lord that what they do is abominable.
    The Torah lists three animals in the masculine form; it is clear that the corresponding females are also forbidden, seeing that the female of the species is considered a sub-category of the male. The same rule applies to the ארנבת “the female hare;” the reason that in this instance the Torah chooses to list the species in its female form is to indicate that the species is bisexual, hermaphrodite by nature, having both male and female genitals.
    Midrash Tanchuma Shemini 8 points out that four animals are mentioned here in four separate verses to allude to four different empires which will play host to the Jewish people in exile. Verse four speaks of גמל, the camel, a reference to the Babylonian exile;  we have a hint of this in Psalms 137,8 בת בבל השדודה אשרי שישלם לך את גמולך שגמלת לנו, “fair Babylon you predator, a blessing on him who repays you in kind what you have inflicted on us.” [the letters of  the word גמל, “camel, appear twice in that verse. Ed.]
    In verse five, the Torah speaks of the שפן, hyrax.” (it has short ears and hoofed feet).This is a reference to the exile under the Greeks which forbade the study and practice of Torah as we know from Amos 8,11: “a time is coming,-declares my Lord G’d,-when I will send a famine upon the land; not a hunger for bread or thirst for water, but for hearing the words of the Lord.” It is also written in verse 12 of that chapter: “men shall wander from sea to sea and from north to east to seek the word of the Lord, but they shall not find it.” [the connection of the above verse to שפן is not clear, there is also a variant in the Tanchuma relating the above verse to the hare, ארנבת, Ed.]
    Concerning the hare, ארנבת, mentioned in verse six, this is a reference to the exile under the Medes, (Ahasverus) which treated the Jewish people as a פאה, the corner of a field the farmer must leave unharvested allowing all comers to help themselves. This is what almost happened under Haman, the regent of that empire. The name of the wife of King Talmay was ארנבת, hare. [Ptolemaus of Egypt, one of the heirs of Alexander’s empire who staked a claim to the land of Israel as part of his share, and was defeated by Antiochus. He commissioned translation of the Bible from Hebrew to Greek. That day was considered a black day in Jewish history by the scholars of the Talmud, Ed.] 
    The pig,חזיר, mentioned in verse 7 is a reference to the Roman empire, the fourth exile, the one which we still endure.  David says in Psalms 80,14: “wild boars gnaw at it and creatures of the forest feed on it.” The word חזיר in that verse is a reminder of the Romans and their Satanic origin, the forest being considered where Satan has its lair. The words וגרה לא יגר, “it does not chew the cud,” is taken as a hint that this is the last exile, i.e. it will not repeat itself. Whereas these animals appear in separate verses in our chapter, in Deut. 14 where the gist of this legislation is repeated, the first three animals mentioned here appear in a single verse except for the pig. The message is that although the first three exiles occurred at different times they have something in common, i.e. the period that they lasted was relatively short. The present exile is in a totally different category  equivalent to all the previous exiles combined. David arranged four separate Thanksgivings in Psalms to acknowledge our salvation from each of these exiles in chapter 136 known as הלל הגדול, “the great Hallel.” He commences with the words “Praise the Lord for He is good, His steadfast loves is eternal.” This line referred to our being redeemed from the Babylonian exile. The second verse “Praise the G’d of G’ds, His steadfast love is eternal,” is an expression of gratitude for our having been redeemed from the exile of the Greeks; the third verse, i.e. “Praise the Lord of lords, His steadfast love is eternal,” refers to our redemption from the exile of the Medes. David uses the expression הודו, ”praise!” in three successive verses to allude to the three animals Moses mentioned in verses 4-5-6 in our chapter. In the last verse of this “Hallel hagadol” where he concludes with the words הודו ל-אל השמים, this is a reference to the redemption from the yoke of the Romans. Seeing that he had foreseen  all these exiles and their redemptions by means of his Holy Spirit, he mentions the word השמים, seeing that of that final redemption it is stated in Psalms 96,11 ישמחו השמים ותגל הארץ, “both the heavens and the earth will rejoice then.” [that psalm which commences with the words שירו לה' שיר חדש, clearly speaks of the final redemption as it will be different from the weaker שירה חדשה which earmarked the thanksgiving for the Exodus from Egypt. Ed.] 
    There is a version in the Tanchuma according to which the reason that the exile of the Roman empire is compared to the pig is because in the future G’d will repay these people יחזיר, with the attribute of Justice. There is even a version according to which the very Romans who destroyed the Temple will be the ones who have to rebuild it, thus making history come full circle and as implied by the meaning of the word חזיר, i.e. something subject to reversal. [This is compatible with Maimonides’ view that the Messiah will build the third Temple, (using the labour of the people who are the political heirs of the Romans, so that they repay their debt to the Jewish people). I have paraphrased some of this paragraph. Ed.]
    11,9. כל אשר לו סנפיר וקשקשת אותם תאכלו, “all that has fins and scales, it you may eat.” The reason why these distinguishing features make fish “pure” is that fish which possess these features always make their habitat in the upper parts of the sea or rivers. The waters there are clear and absorb a certain amount of daylight and sunshine. This influences their growth and development. The scales are for fish what hair and wool are for mammals, helping them retain warmth. Fish which lack these features make their habitat in lower layers of the water being exposed to the darkness prevailing there and the murkiness of the waters. They have no protection against these negative influences prevailing in their habitat. (based on the writings of Nachmanides). [The reader is aware of the speculative nature of these comments, especially at a time when the authors did not know of such phenomena as the gulf-stream and other “streams” some warm some cold, which are present in different parts of the oceans. Ed.]
    
    11,11. מבשרם לא תאכלו ואת נבלתם תשקצו, “you are not to eat of their meat, and you must abhor their carcass.”  After the Torah forbade consumption of fish or creatures dwelling in the waters which do not have fins and scales, the Torah also forbids trading in them. This is the meaning  of the words ואת נבלתם תשקצו, a Biblical prohibition according to Rabbeinu Saadyah gaon, not merely a rabbinic decree based on an allusion in the verse. There are altogether eight objects which one may not trade in; four are forbidden to trade in because they are of such elevated status; the other four are forbidden because they are considered of such inferior status. The four whose elevated status makes them unfit as a subject for trade or barter are: 1) anything which has been sanctified for the Lord; seeing the object is G’d’s it is unseemly to barter it; also, G’d does not need to make a profit (compare Ketuvot 106). Seeing that everything in this universe is G’d’s anyway (compare Chagai 2,8 “Mine is the silver, and Mine is the gold, says the Lord G’d of Hosts”), the treasurer of the Temple is not allowed to even engage in negotiations to increase the Temple treasury by selling sacred object at a profit. It would be demeaning for G’d. It is his task to keep all these objects safe, no more, no less. What we have said so far concerns items which have been declared as sacred, i.e. property of the Temple treasury without the donor having given specific instructions concerning them  However, if someone donates money to the Temple treasury with a condition attached, such as that the Temple Treasurer use this money to lend it at interest (to Gentiles) this is perfectly in order. This is why many Jewish communities are in the money-lending business.
    2) anything which has been designated for tzedakah, charitable purposes (Ketuvot 96). One of the reasons that the treasurer of such a charitable fund is not allowed to convert the funds into something other than cash is that if suddenly he were called upon to pay out money to free certain captives, or to provide food for certain desperately needy families, he would be unable to do so unless all the money on deposit with him for charitable purposes were at hand for immediate use. In such an event, the “profit” which would accrue to such a fund when the loan is repaid with interest would actually turn out to have been a loss as the inability to meet demands made upon the fund immediately might result in the death of a person entitled to support from it. 3) It is also forbidden to trade in the proceeds of the firstborn which is blemished and therefore unfit to be offered on the Altar, or to trade in tithes (tenth animal). Both of these categories of animal, seeing they cannot be offered on the Altar, may be eaten by their respective owners, but the owner must not use them as an object of barter. This is the meaning of Deut. 15,22: “you may eat them within your gates,” i.e. you may consume them but not trade with them. 4) the produce of the Shemittah year is also forbidden to trade in though the person who gathered it may freely eat from it. This is what our sages derived from the words לאכלה, “for eating,” but not for “trading in them,” (Leviticus 25,6 and the Talmud Bechorot 12).
    The four items which are of too inferior a status for the Torah to allow us to trade in them are: the meat of animals which died of natural causes, the meat of animals which died through disease or injury; the animals described in the Torah as שקצים ורמשים  “loathsome, and creepers.” If one happens to own such animals already, not having acquired them, it is permitted to sell them just as he may trade in or sell pure animals which are in his possession. [the above definition of “in his possession” includes animals which were trapped but are of the forbidden category. [whereas the hunter had meant to trap only permitted animals, an impure animal became trapped.] In the case of forbidden fish and other creatures of the sea such as lobsters, crabs, oysters, etc., they are forbidden to be traded in both when dead and when alive. This is why the Torah added: “and their carcass you should treat as something loathsome.”
    
    11,13. ואת אלה תשקצו מן העוף, “and the following you are to treat as loathsome categories of birds, etc.”  the word מן means “from among,” i.e. “from among the birds the majority of which are pure and wholesome.” Chulin 63 confirms that there are more birds which are pure, i.e. which theoretically may be eaten (if one can capture them intact). This is why the Torah lists only the impure ones by name, seeing that they are in the minority and make a shorter list. In fact, our sages used this list as an example for saying that when teaching one should be careful to teach matters to one’s student in a compact form. When a person asks someone to choose one object amongst many he does not ask him to eliminate the many but to single out the one he wants as this takes less time and effort. The Torah follows this principle when writing (Leviticus 20,25) “You shall distinguish between the clean (pure) animal and the unclean (impure), and between the unclean bird and the clean;” when mentioning the four-legged animals the Torah first mentioned the pure categories as they are fewer than he impure beasts; in the case of the birds the Torah referred first to the unclean birds as they are fewer than the clean birds.
    Nachmanides writes that the distinguishing mark between birds which qualify for consumption by Jews and those we may not eat is  דריסה, the manner in which the bird walks, i.e. how its toes are arranged. Any bird which attacks with its claws is automatically known as an “unclean” bird. Our sages (Chulin 62) mention that the reason the Torah forbade consumption of such birds is that it is more hot-blooded, the blood turning black, the character of the bird revealing a cruel streak. Eating such a bird would leave a residue of the character of the animal in the person who consumed it. The objectionable part of such a bird of prey is that it hunts live prey, does not kill it first before feasting on it. Apparently hawks operate in this manner.
    As to four-legged beasts, perhaps the fact that among those that chew the cud and have split hooves we do not find a single beast which is a beast of prey, may account for the fact that the Torah permitted these categories as food fit for Jews. All other types of four-legged mammals are forbidden by the Torah. We find another peculiarity distinguishing between the forbidden and the permitted species of animals. The milk of all the forbidden animals does not lend itself to making cheese, i.e. it does not keep, does not congeal, whereas the milk of the animals we are permitted to eat can be converted into cheese. The author speculates further on the deficiencies resulting from such strange behaviour of the milk of the forbidden animals, adding that he read in a medical textbook that if one suckled from the pig’s milk a child might contract leprosy as a result. This would be just an example that everyone of these forbidden animals contains within it negative influences for those who eat or drink of it. Thus far Nachmanides.
    An additional reason why the impure birds are forbidden may be simply that G’d loves humility and similar good traits and hates arrogance and similar repugnant traits. The animals which have been approved by G’d as fit to serve as sacrifices for Him, are also suitable to be eaten by us. Seeing that G’d rejected all birds described as impure as possible sacrifices, He also excluded them as potential food for the Israelites. All this is to teach us and impress upon us how much G’d hates the negative virtues displayed by birds of prey. This is why very often the prophets compared evil and cruel people to certain categories of birds of prey such as Jeremiah 49,22 who wrote: “see like the eagle he flies up, he soars and spreads his wings against Bozra.” Or, Deut. 28,49 where Moses says: “the Lord will bring a nation against you from afar, which will swoop down like the eagle;”  evil people have been compared to the predatory animals such as the lion in Jeremiah 5,6: “Therefore, the lion of the forest strikes them down, the wolf of the desert devours them; a leopard lies in wait by their towns” (the prophet speaks of the hypocrisy practiced by the inhabitants of the city of Jerusalem). David mentions wild beasts in such a context in Psalms 58,7 when he writes: “O G’d smash their teeth in their mouth; shatter the fangs of lions, O Lord.” Or, Psalms 57,5: “as for me, I lie down among man-eating lions whose  teeth are spears and arrows, whose tongue is a sharp sword.”
    By contrast, the righteous are usually compared to the kind of animals that are harmless, models of creatures with whom one can live in peace. Examples are Isaiah 5,17: “the lambs shall graze as in their meadows,” or Maleachi 3,20: “you shall go forth and stamp like stall-fed calves;” or Hoseah 11,11: “they shall flutter from Egypt like sparrows, from the land of Assyria like doves.” 
    Another reason why all these birds are considered impure may be the curious fact that the מנחשים, soothsayers and fortune-tellers, always use the bones of the birds which the Torah classifies as impure to practice their art. The Torah hates sooth-saying, has categorically forbidden it and decreed the death penalty for Jews practicing this art. We may therefore surmise that in addition to forbidding such birds because they are cruel birds of prey they are also symbolic of a form of rebellion against G’d when they are being used to reveal the future which G’d in His wisdom has seen fit to conceal from us. [The author quotes from theories of soothsayers regarding the efficacy of using different birds of prey in their craft. I do not consider this worth repeating. Ed.]
    
    11,19. הדוכיפת, “the duchifass.” This is a wild rooster  whose comb is doubled over and according to Rashi the bird known as hoopoe. It brought the shamir worm to the Temple (not deliberately) to enable Solomon to split stones without having to use metal tools (Chulin 63.). There is a comment in Gittin 68 that  relates that the prince of the demons Ashmadai told Solomon that he had no idea where to get the shamir and that perhaps the duchifass could get it for him. The Talmud relates how the duchifass was tricked into releasing that worm, explaining the strange-sounding translation by Onkelos who renders the word as נגר טורא. “carpenter of the mountains.”
    
    11,30. והחומט והתנשומת, “the snail and the mole.” The Torah lists eight creeping creatures saying: “these are contaminated as far as you are concerned,” without including the snake. Surely this is puzzling as we would have expected the snake to be the prime example of a contaminated creeping creature, seeing it had introduced impurity into the world! We must answer that it is the way of the Torah whose paths are those of striving for peace, not to make touching the snake an offense resulting in ritual impurity; if the Torah had done so it might cause people not to kill snakes in order not to run afoul of that prohibition seeing killing involved touching. This is why the Torah refers to the snake indirectly when referring to “all that crawls on its belly, etc.” (verse 42) which clearly includes the snake. The words “it walks on four (legs)” is a reference to the hornet (according to Sifra Shemini 12,2 ) on the same verse. The creepers described in verse 42 as “walking on many legs,” are the centipedes. These creatures (verse 33) pose grave threats to human beings seeing they infect them with poison. They also cause fatal diseases. This is why the Torah adds the words כי שקץ הם, they are “loathsome,” in addition to the prohibition to eat these creatures. Touching those creatures is perfectly permissible. The eight previously mentioned creatures do not possess poisonous teeth or glands.
    
    11,38. וכי יותן מים על זרע, “But if water had been placed upon a seed,” this verse prompted our sages (Sifra Shemini 11,5) to say that water is a preparatory step to cause plants -including seed which has not yet taken root- to contract ritual impurity. As soon as water (rain) falls on such produce (provided the owner is content that it does) they become capable of being ritually contaminated. They then remain potentially capable of becoming impure even while perfectly dry. The reason is that if we were to treat the cause of the impurity as only objectionable when it sticks to wet or moist produce (after harvest) then the Torah would introduce a double standard, something halachically never accepted.  Either certain produce is subject to ritual impurity or it is not. To make it potentially impure only when it is in a state of wetness is not practical.
    11,39. וכי ימות מן הבהמה, “if any of the animals (which are pure) has died by natural causes, etc.” The Torah should have used the expression תמות, (feminine form of “it will die”) seeing that the noun בהמה is feminine. Had the Torah written the word תמות we would have concluded that such a carcass can confer ritual impurity only when it is whole, but that sections of it could not confer impurity. By using the masculine ימות we infer that any part of it חלק (masc.) is capable of conferring ritual impurity through contact with it. The expression מן הבהמה must be understood as “part of the beast,”‘ not as “any of certain categories called בהמה.” The expression matches the words וכי יפול מנבלתם “if part of their carcass falls, etc.,” in verse 37. Seeing that the word נבלה which is the subject in that verse is feminine, the Torah could also have been expected to write וכי תפול instead of וכי יפול. Seeing it did not, we can surmise that the same considerations which prompted the use of the masculine form in verse 39 also prompted the use of the masculine form in verse 37. 
    As to the words: “he who touches their carcass” (verse 36), or the words: “who eats of them” in verse 40, our sages explained that such parts of the carcass as the hooves, antlers, horns, skin and hair are exempt from the rule that they confer impurity provided these parts are no longer attached to the flesh when one touches them or eats them. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Ma-achalot Assurot 4,18). Proof of this is that we find that the Israelites took as part of their booty in war numerous vessels made of leather after the campaign against Midian (Numbers 31,20) and the Torah okayed their use by the Israelites after they had been duly immersed in a ritual bath. If these items had possessed the same degree of impurity as the carcasses they had been removed from, no amount of immersion in a ritual bath or other process of purification would have sufficed to permit their use by the Israelites.  We also find that Solomon made for himself a throne of ivory (tusk of the elephant, same category as horns) as reported in Kings I 10,18.
    
    11,40. והאוכל מנבלתם, “if someone eats of the carcass of any of these animals, etc.” Here the Torah speaks of the carcass of a pure bird which had not (previously) conferred ritual impurity on the person eating it through his having touched it. Four-legged pure animals which have died by natural causes (נבלה) do confer impurity by mere touch of their carcass. Not only does the carcass of a pure bird not confer impurity through touch of its carcass by one’s body, but it does not confer impurity when contacting the clothing of the person touching it. The only time it confers impurity is while it is in the gullet of a person swallowing it and that person wears clothing. The clothing of such a person does become ritually impure through such indirect exposure. (Maimonides She-ar Avot Hatum-ah 3,1). It follows from the above that in our verse the word בהמה must include birds. Seeing that this is so there was no need for the Torah to write that the carcasses of free-roaming four-legged pure animals are also included in this legislation (compare Sifra Shemini 2,8).
    Do not be amazed that according to our tradition the immediate subject of this verse are the pure birds, nor that we understood the term בהמה as applying to a category of bird. This is not the only time in the Torah that such a meaning of the word בהמה is accepted in halachah. We find that the Torah writes (Leviticus 24,21) “one who strikes an animal (בהמה) shall make restitution.” There is certainly no reason to assume that that legislation does not include birds and people who have harmed them. It is simply the style of the Torah to mention examples of things more common rather than situations which are rare. When the Torah writes (Exodus 22,9) that the owner of an ox or a donkey or other four-legged beast which he has entrusted to someone and which has died, is entitled to either compensation or an oath that the person in charge had not been negligent, it goes without saying that if the dead animal had been a bird the same rule would apply.
    
    11,41. וכל השרץ השורץ על הארץ שקץ הוא לא יאכל, “and all teeming creatures that teem on the ground-it is something abhorrent, it shall not be eaten.” This refers to the worms growing in fruit such as in dates and figs, as well as the ones in lentils and peas (Chulin 67). In verse 42 the Torah mentions  לכל השרץ השורץ על הארץ, which sounds like a repetition. Actually, there the Torah had modified the word השורץ first by saying ההולך על הארץ. The animals mentioned in verse 42 are the result of the male and female of those species having mated in the accepted manner. Man endangers himself by eating these creatures. The ones described as “walking on its belly” are the snakes; the ones described as “walking on four,” are the hornets; the expression כל, i.e. “all,” is applied to four-legged dung beetles and the like. The word מרבה רגלים, “having many feet,” refers to centipedes of all kinds. The words על הארץ repeated once more, refer to such moths, worms, etc., which are generated in mould, garbage, compost, etc.
    
    11,43. בכל השרץ השורץ, “through any of the teeming creatures which teem.” Significantly, the words “on earth,” are absent in this verse. If the Torah had added these words (as previously) we would have thought that the warning not to allow these abhorrent things to contaminate us was limited to the creatures moving about on the earth. We are aware already that the creature known as עכבר, exists both on land and in the sea (compare Chulin 126). When seen on land we know it as “a mouse.” The same applies to some of the species which we are not familiar with. By omitting mention of “on land,” the Torah ensures that we know that all the creatures bearing the names mentioned here, be they land-based or water-based, fall under the same prohibition. He who eats them makes himself an abomination and defiles himself ritually. 
   ולא תטמאו בהם ונטמתם בם, “and do not contaminate yourselves by means of them so that you will not become contaminated through them.” The first warning לא תטמאו refers to our bodies, whereas the second warning i.e. ונטמתם refers to the effect eating such abominable things would have on our souls. The word ונטמתם is written without the letter א after the letter מ. According to Yuma 39 the hidden warning in that missing letter א is that anyone eating these creatures would become מטומטם, “dull-witted” as a result. Man’s heart becomes “encrusted” through the ingestion of such forbidden creatures so that it is no longer accessible to the Holy Spirit.
    It is possible that the origin of this interpretation is the fact that the letter א symbolises the One and Only Creator. Absence of this letter where it should have appeared suggests that the One and Only One was unable to gain entrance to the heart of the person who had contaminated himself by eating these abhorrent creatures which the Torah has forbidden. G’d’s presence always withdraws from where ritual impurity prevails. Compare what is written in Deut. 23,15: “for Hashem,  your G’d, walks in the midst of your camp to rescue you and to deliver your enemies before you, your camp shall be sacred. He shall not see any shameful thing (anything obscene) among you and turn away from you.” This is also the meaning in another verse where the letter א has been mysteriously omitted. 
    We read in Genesis 20,6 where G’d appeared to Avimelech in a dream and the latter complains that seeing he was innocent why should G’d warn him of killing him, that G’d responds that his innocence in deed was due only to ואחשך אותך מחטו לי, “I, G’d have prevented you from sinning against Me.” The word מחטו in that verse should really have been spelled מחטא, i.e. with the letter א added at the end. Absence of that letter then indicates that G’d is holding something back, in Avimelech’s case He frustrated his free choice to rape Sarah by making him impotent.
    When reflecting further on this concept, we may say that when we call someone קדוש, holy, in referring to him, we have in mind someone who has distinguished himself in devoting himself exclusively to the service of the Lord. By the same token, if someone has devoted himself with equal enthusiasm and determination to carnal pursuits the Torah calls such a person קדש, almost the same word without the letter ו. The letter ו is part of the tetragram; its absence in the word קדש points out the chasm between one kind of dedication and the other kind of dedication. Sanctity, i.e. קדושה  cannot co-exist with dedication to ritual impurity such as sexual misconduct. All this gives you an idea of the power of the Hebrew language if such a radical change in behaviour can be expressed by such a minor change in the spelling of a word. It defies our imagination to realise what tremendous concepts “hang” by the slender thread of a single vowel or consonant.
    Our sages in Yuma 39 taught that the words in our verse: “do not contaminate yourselves so that you do not become contaminated,” mean that if a person begins by contaminating himself just a little, others will ultimately contaminate him a lot. If a person becomes guilty of contaminating himself here on earth, there are forces in the celestial regions which will contaminate him there. If a person contaminates himself in this life, he will be considered as contaminated regarding life in the hereafter. It is due to considerations of this nature that the Torah continues with the exhortation (verse 44): “sanctify yourselves so that you will be holy, for I am holy.” The Torah promises: “if you sanctify your body, I, G’d, will sanctify your soul.” and will assure you of life in the hereafter.
    
    11,44. והתקדשתם והייתם קדושים כי קדוש אני, “Sanctify yourselves and become holy for I am holy.” The sanctity the Torah speaks of here is one which is associated more with the Jewish people than with any other nation. It is attainable only through the study of Torah and performance of its tenets. Study of Torah and performance of its commandments strengthens the forces of our intelligence and weakens our tendency to indulge our various cravings. It is a well known fact that these cravings are a constituent part of our psyche and initially are more powerful drives than our intellect. We possess cravings from the moment we are born whereas our intellect begins to develop only as we grow older. It is not surprising therefore that initially man has a tendency to indulge his cravings and to allow them full reign. Maturity in years is the time when the intellect, the force which is to predominate within us proves itself capable of displacing the influence of these various cravings we experience since youth. Unfortunately, these various cravings also become more powerful as our body develops, so that they threaten to overpower the voice of reason, i.e. our intelligence. Seeing that the intelligence with which man has been equipped originates in the celestial regions, it is an alien in this terrestrial world and as such has to contend with many entrenched forces in its efforts of trying to  assert itself. It is a solitary force within man, not enjoying natural allies as do the various cravings all of which are enjoying the encouragement of various parts of our bodies. This is why Torah and its commandments are so essential to the development of our intellectual/spiritual forces as if left to its own devices the intelligence and spiritual forces of man would be overpowered by opposite tendencies.
    Seeing that the Torah contains commandments addressed to the way we treat our bodies, i.e. what not to eat, what not to drink, etc., fulfilling these directives is a powerful tool in reining in the various cravings man is subject to. Restrictions on the sexual outlets we are permitted, the commandment to spend time devoted to prayer, handing out charity, etc., etc., all play a vital part in keeping our cravings under control and in eventually attaining the Torah’s objective that we become holy. This explains the comment in Sifri that the words והתקדשתם והייתם קדושים mean “if you will keep the commandments you will achieve sanctity.”
    The word והתקדשתם, may also be understood in terms of פרישות, asceticism, introversion, abstinence. Anyone who displays abstinence from the pleasures this world has to offer is considered holy, קדוש. Similarly, our sages in Torat Kohanim Sifra Shemini 12,3  explain the verse simply by reversing these words and translating: “just as I am holy, I want you to sanctify yourselves. Just as I am ascetic, separate, I want you to practice similar traits.” The idea is that man should try not to indulge in any of the cravings which are natural to him unless they are vital for his health and well-being. When someone manages to deny himself all the physical gratifications which are permissible but not necessary for his health and well-being he is called קדוש, holy. Anyone however, who indulges bodily cravings over and beyond the necessary minimum is called כסיל, “fool.” The more one indulges physical cravings the greater the likelihood of committing infractions of Torah law (compare Proverbs 20, 3). This is why the Torah had to write the instruction “sanctify yourselves!” Restrictions that are desirable do not only include too much food and drink and marital relations with one’s wife, but also excess use of one’s mouth for unnecessary conversation. This is why Solomon said in Proverbs 15,2: “the tongue of the wise uses knowledge properly; the mouths of fools express folly.” Solomon continues immediately, warning: “the eyes of G’d are everywhere; they behold both the good and the wicked.” He meant that G’d’s supervisory stance is such that people guilty of offending speech may expect to pay the price. The prophet Isaiah 9,16 deals with the same subject when he said: “that is why my Lord will not spare their youths, nor show compassion to their orphans and to their widows; for they are all ungodly and wicked and every mouth speaks impiety.” The reason the prophet singles out the youths, the immature in years, is that they more than older people are guilty of such abuse of the power of speech. The Talmud Shabbat 33 remarks on the subject of improper use of one’s power of speech that anyone guilty of this sin will experience that he will sink even lower inside gehinom, purgatory. They base this on Proverbs 22,14: “the mouth of the immoral woman  is a deep pit; he who is doomed by the Lord will fall into it.” We also find that the prophet Ezekiel has something pertinent to say on this subject in Ezekiel 35,10: “because you said: ‘the two nations and the two lands will be mine and we shall inherit them!’ But Hashem was there.” The prophet goes on to threaten retribution for such abuse of one’s mouth, telling us that G’d is mindful of such boasts.
    A Midrashic approach to our verse is that it is a warning to man to have a clean body and clean hands, seeing this all comes under the heading of פרישות. Accordingly, they view the word והתקדשתם as an instruction to wash before the meal and the words והייתם קדושים as a warning to wash one’s hands after the completion of the meal (what is known as מים אחרונים). The words כי קדוש אני are understood by that Midrash as referring to the use of oil for anointing one’s body. Finally, the words אני ה' אלו-היכם are understood as a blessing (compare Berachot 53). The idea underlying this interpretation is that when man sits down to eat, i.e. to indulge a basic physical craving he is to sanctify himself with three different kinds of sanctification in order to make the meal something spiritual rather than a mere physical indulgence. The first two kinds of “sanctification,” (washing) are meant to cleanse the body, the third one (the anointing), is intended to arouse the dormant spiritual forces within the body through the pleasant fragrance of the oil. When he has done all this, such a person is entitled to G’d’s blessing.
    
    
   אשה  כי  תזריע
    
   שמחה לאיש במענה פיו ודבר בעתו מה טוב, “A ready response causes man joy; how good is a word spoken at the right time!” (Prov.15,23) In this verse Solomon explains that if a person speaks wisely, weighing his words carefully, he will derive pleasure from this; the reason is that such words originate with the intellect at the instigation of the intellectual soul which is part of man. This is what gives man his advantage over other creatures on earth. This is why the gift of speech is attributed to G’d of whom Isaiah 57,19 said בורא ניב שפתים, “who creates the fruit of the lips.” By making this comment the prophet praised the Lord just  as he had praised Him for having created heaven and earth and the stars (Isaiah 42,5) which are viewed as “independent” creations imbued with intelligence (compare Maimonides Yesodey Hatorah 3,9). The gist of Solomon’s statement is that when man prepares his words carefully so that they express his thoughts accurately, and he uses his G’d-given intelligence to do so, he will enjoy the results. It is well known that whereas it is within man’s power to plan what he wants to do, the actual words he speaks (execution of his plans) are not under his control but are under G’d’s control as we know from Proverbs 16,1: לאדם מערכי לב ומה' מענה לשון, “a man may plan with his heart; but the answer of the tongue comes from the Lord.” When man’s planning and the thoughts he expresses as a result of his planning are in tandem, reflect his thoughts, this is cause for joy as it proves that G’d has approved what he had in mind. It means that he enjoys Divine assistance in what he is embarking on.
    Solomon also means that although everything man thinks may be fully correct, expressing his thoughts at the wrong time and at the wrong place are not. If a man has composed a beautiful poem and set it to music and proceeds to sing his song in the house of mourning, this would be a prime example of  doing the right thing at the wrong time. The same applies to someone composing an elegy and proceeding to read it in public at a joyous occasion. In both instances the misplaced sense of timing results in the composer’s words not being appreciated, not causing joy to the composer. Hence Solomon emphasises in the above verse the importance of “speaking the right words at the right time.” Our sages in Bereshit Rabbah 27,4 have said that at a time of joy it is appropriate to say things of a joyful nature, whereas at a time of mourning the reverse is in place. Our sages in Megillah 32, speaking of the same subject, have stipulated that the laws about the observance of Passover should be studied and discussed at or before Passover, whereas the laws pertaining to Tabernacles should be discussed thirty days prior to that festival, etc. Discussing the laws of Tabernacles around Passover time does not reflect a proper sense of timing. All these considerations prompted Solomon to write the verse we quoted at the introduction, i.e. emphasising the importance of a sense of timing. Sometimes we have an urge to share some thought with our peers or our students because we are so convinced of the importance of the message of our thoughts. One needs to consider carefully if the time is appropriate for voicing such a thought, as voicing it at the wrong time or in the wrong environment may diminish its impact. Even the best ideas must be presented only at the appropriate time.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Bereshit Rabbah 3,3). The words שמחה לאיש which Solomon speaks about in Proverbs 15,23 are a reference to G’d, seeing G’d (the Lord) is described as ה' איש מלחמה, “The Lord is a man of war” (Exodus 15,3), similarly, the expression במענה פיו, “with the expression of his mouth,” refers to the timing of G’d saying: “let there be light and it was light” (Genesis 1,3). The words ודבר בעתו מה טוב, “and how good is a word spoken at its appropriate time,” reflect what the Torah said “G’d saw the light and it was good,” i.e. He had given the directive at precisely the right time, [having waited 974 generations for that moment according to our tradition. Ed.] Thus far the Midrash.
    We know that the words: “G’d saw that it was good,” appear in connection with all the six days of creation [except the second day, but twice with the third day, Ed.]. This means that G’d’s directives calling the respective parts of the universe into existence and arranging for them to function were all the result of דבר בעתו, “a word spoken at the time appropriate for it.” This does not conflict with the view we expressed that the entire universe was created at one and the same moment. Our sages have already illustrated how we are to understand this apparent contradiction when they told us the parable about the farmer who planted six different seeds all at the same time. The plants growing out of these different seeds each germinated, grew and became ripe at different times (Bereshit Rabbah 12,3). Even though they were all put in the earth at the same time, they did not grow at a uniform rate of speed. Concerning such careful timing by G’d Solomon said in Kohelet 3,1: “He did everything at the appropriate time.” The creatures which matured later were not inferior, but on the contrary, they were superior, more sophisticated. As a result, man was the most superior creature of all coming into meaningful existence last. Similarly, the Sabbath is the best of all the days seeing it was last to make its appearance. Israel was the last nation to emerge as a separate nation, 70 other nations having preceded it. This makes the Jewish nation the choicest of them all. Although the last to make their appearance on the stage of history, G’d had planned to have a Jewish people on earth long before He made provision for all the other nations to become historical entities. By the same token, the hereafter, known as עולם הבא, precisely because it takes such a long time to mature, to emerge from its cocoon, is a superior world. We have evidence that Israel was first in G’d’s planning from Jeremiah 2,2: “Israel is holy to G’d the first (and choicest) of His harvest.” In other words, the first (and finest) harvest G’d looked forward to was Israel. The other nations may be viewed as “miscarriages,” fetuses prematurely aborted. When G’d referred to the Jewish people in the verse from Jeremiah we just quoted in translation, He did not use the adjective kadosh or kedoshim to describe their being holy, but He chose the word kodesh, a noun, meaning that Israel was holy in its own right. The implication is that the Jewish people draw on the source of holiness for their existence. We find a similar word when the Torah commands or promises the Jewish people that their destiny is to be or become אנשי קודש, “men (and women) devoted to holiness” (Exodus 22,30). When the Torah describes the Jewish people as G’d’s portion (Deut. 32,9), the idea is similarly that the Jewish people are part of G’d, i.e. of His Holiness. G’d did not assign inter-stellar forces, signs of the zodiac known as mazzalot to supervise the fortunes of the Jewish people as He had done for the 70 nations of the earth, but instead He supervises them personally by means of what is known as hashgachah peratit, “personal benevolent supervision of our collective and individual fates.” When Israel was described as G’d’s first harvest, ראשית תבואתה, (the reading of the last letter is “au”, i.e. the masculine pronoun referring to Hashem). Remember that there are five species of grain all of which are “harvested.” The word ראשית derived from ראש, head, means “the choicest.” The letter ה at the end of the word תבואתה  may refer to the 5 kinds of physical harvests, i.e. the five different kinds of grain from which bread is made, or, in the case of the Jewish people, to the five kinds of spiritual harvest, i.e. the “Five Books of Moses,” the Torah. The choicest of the five species of grain is wheat, whereas the choicest Books of the Bible (Torah) are the Five Books of Moses. Concerning all this, the Midrash quotes a parable. There was a king who betrothed a bride to himself giving her five rings as token of the betrothal. The number “five” corresponded to the betrothal between G’d and Israel described in Hoseah 2,21-22 with the words: “I will betroth you to Me forever, with righteousness, with justice, with goodness and with mercy; and I will betroth you to Me with faithfulness, and you will be devoted to the Lord.” This then is the meaning of the word ראשית, i.e. it ranks first. The “first” of which the prophet speaks includes that Israel ranks higher in attributes than the other nations, and that it also enjoys an advantage in time, i.e. they were the first consideration G’d entertained when He planned to create man, etc. The word ראשית denoting superior quality is found in Amos 6,6 ראשית השמנים, “the choicest of the oils.” The same word describing precedence in terms of time occurs in Genesis 10,10  ותהי ראשית ממלכתו בבל, “the first country under his rule was Babylon.”
    We have established that whereas Israel was first in terms of G’d’s planning it was last in terms of that plan being executed. Consider the fact that Esau and the rulers descended from him preceded Yaakov’s development as a nation commencing with Esau’s birth which is described as “the first one emerged (from Rivkah’s womb) very reddish looking, etc.” (Genesis 25,25). Esau developed much earlier than his twin Yaakov. Esau married at the age of 40. The only reason the Torah bothered to tell us all these details about Esau and his descendants is to contrast them with Yaakov who was a “late bloomer,” not marrying until he was 84 years of age. Nonetheless, David already said in Psalms 40,6 “You have set out wonders and  devised them for us.” We find a saying in the Kuzari 3,73 that תחלת המחשבה סוף המעשה, “that which came first in planning was the last to be carried out.” 
    Let us illustrate the reason for such apparently illogical behaviour. Reuven wanted to study Torah but did not have a study hall with the requisite library. In order to carry out his plan he first has to build the study hall and acquire the necessary books. In other words, the Torah study, the purpose of all these endeavours, can only be carried out after preparatoy activities. The parable we just described has much in common with a comment by our sages on Deut. 2,19 exhorting us not to harass the Moabites or Ammonites. In answer to the question why G’d had singled out these two nations, warning the Israelites not to harass them, our sages in Baba Batra 35 explain hat this was on account of two great descendants that would emerge from these two peoples, Ruth the Moabite and Naamah the Ammonite. Clearly, although these women were born many hundreds of years later than the Israelites’ trek through the desert, this is another example of future events casting long shadows ahead, i.e. G’d’s foreknowledge determining present day behaviour. All of the examples mentioned showed that fruits which develop later are superior to results which are visible immediately. One may compare this to someone who has lost a pearl at the beach and who sieves through bucket after bucket of sand, until finally, he finds the pearl. All that sand, though apparently having no immediate use, was necessary in order to enable the pearl to be found. All the tedium of sifting the sand proved worthwhile in retrospect. This explains much of human history, and even much of Jewish history. Tanchuma Vayeshev 1 explains the ten generations between Adam and Noach and the ones between Noach and Avraham as necessary preludes to someone like Avraham. All of human history and G’d’s frustrations with its disobedience to Him must find their justification in the eventual emergence of such pearls as Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov.
    The tedious process of ploughing, seeding, etc., etc., has only one ultimate but long delayed objective, i.e. the fruit which the soil or tree will yield as a result. Man is described by David in Psalms 139,5 as ראשון ואחרון צרתני, “You have formed me both first and last;” David meant that though man was the last creature to emerge on earth on the sixth day, he was the first in G’d’s planning of the entire creative process. The word ראשון in that psalm may also mean “choicest, most accomplished.” The word אחרון of course, applies to the process of actual creation.
    As soon as G’d created man, He gave him the first positive commandment as well as a negative commandment. The first commandment was that he was to eat from all the tress in Gan Eden; the first negative commandment was that he was not to eat from the tree of knowledge.
    In a manner paralleling what G’d commanded Adam when He had placed him in Gan Eden, in the previous portion the Torah devoted three paragraphs to different categories of life in this terrestrial earth and how such animals may or may not interact with superior forms of life, i.e. man. First the Torah deals with the mammals, animals whose primary raw material is earth, dust, i.e. the most primitive of the four elements making up the terrestrial universe which we discussed already. Secondly, it deals with what  may and what may not be eaten of the animals primarily formed from the element water, a slightly more sophisticated element. Thirdly, it dealt with which birds may not be eaten, i.e. creatures whose primary element is the רוח, the wind, i.e. an element much closer to the celestial domain than the previous two. Finally, beginning with our portion, the Torah addresses the most superior creature, i.e. man and immediately repeats the commandment of circumcision as if to emphasise that further refinement of man the species was still necessary. The Torah makes plain by means of this commandment that the principal reason man has been created is to perform G’d’s commandments. This is what Job had in mind (Job 5,7) when we are told there that אדם לעמל יולד, “man has been born in order to toil.” The “toil” referred to is the effort involved in studying and observing G’d’s Torah. This is the reason why the commandments connected to a woman giving birth are surrounded by a variety of commandments both before and after that particular paragraph. The commandments preceding the laws to be observed in connection with the birth of a human being all deal with permitted or forbidden food. This is what our sages (in Tanchuma Tazria 1) had in mind when they interpreted the above-mentioned verse in Psalms 139,5 to mean that the אחור, “after,” the prophet referred to were all the mammals, birds and creeping creatures which had been created before man, whereas the word קדם they understand as applying to the human baby being born to whom G’d already gave directives concerning how to conduct itself after it would leave the mother’s womb. In other words, man’s creation or birth is conditional on his keeping G’d’s commandments. The immediate commandment is the perfor- mance of circumcision of the male baby. [Or, seeing the fetus is taught the Torah while still in its mother’s womb, this is what entitles it to be born. Ed.]
    12,2. אשה כי תזריע, “when a woman conceives, etc.,” Actually, the Torah should have written simply: “when a woman gives birth, etc.” What duties devolve upon her as a result of merely conceiving? The Torah reveals here that even if no live fetus is born and the fetus is no longer recognisable as such when aborted (compare Rashi based on Niddah 27), the rule 
    about impurity contracted as a result of pregnancy or abortion applies. This word is why our sages in Niddah 31 state that when the woman is the first one to experience orgasm during marital relations the baby born will be male. The reverse is true when the husband reaches climax first. When the Talmud uses the expression מזרעת in describing this process we translated as “orgasm” or “climax” when applicable to the woman, this refers to the fluid supplied by the woman [seeing that the word appears to be a misnomer, a woman not having semen, Ed.]. The fluid meant by the Talmud (according to our author) is the menstrual blood inside her womb. This fluid is called אודם, a reddish looking fluid in the Hebrew of the Mishnah. The parallel fluid of the male is known as לובן, i.e. a whitish fluid. Both fluids are known as זרע, “seed,” “semen.” Compare Niddah 31 where we are told that there are three partners needed to produce a human being, 1) G’d, 2) the father; and 3) the mother. According to the Talmud the father’s contribution of the לובן will result in the infant’s brain, tendons, and bones as well as its nails and the white of its eye. The אודם contributed by the mother will turn into the skin, blood, and flesh of the infant, the hair and pupil of the eye. G’d contributes the spirit, the soul, and the exterior appearance of the face as well as the ability of the eye to see, the power of speech and the lips, as well as the ability of the legs to walk, knowledge, insight and intelligence.
    The word תזריע is transitive, i.e. denotes an active participation. According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of this word (Ibn Ezra) is that she hands over the “semen” which is on deposit with her from the male much as the earth yields up the seed deposited in the soil of the field for it to emerge at the proper time as the desired product. This is the reason why Exodus 21,22 writes כאשר ישית עליו בעל האשה, “as the husband of the woman (who aborted due to the injury) will impose on the guilty party.” Seeing that the children of a woman are considered the husband’s (property), the Torah did not write כאשר תשית עליו האשה “as the woman (the actually injured party) imposes on the one who caused her injury.” The husband may  assess the loss he has suffered in financial terms. See my comments in Exodus 21,22. (page 1148 our translation)
    However, the scientists claim that the entire fetus (body) is part of the mother and that the man’s part or contribution to it is only an ingredient they called היולי, “genes”  (something primeval, original) which influences the shape and composition of the material as soon as the man’s semen mixes with the blood of the woman. At the same time it also eliminates the sperm which will not fertilise the ovum of the woman. Its effect on those parts is similar to the effect of the stomach of an animal introduced into milk to make it congeal and become cheese. According to these scientists there is evidence supporting their claims. 
    1) They compare the formation of a human fetus to the fertilisation of a hen’s egg which grows and hatches a chick through having been fertilised by the male, the rooster. Whenever the hen absorbs that semen from the earth through rolling around on the ground and not directly from the rooster, it fails to produce a chick. This is due to absence of physical contact with the rooster which alone would provide the shape and outward appearance of the product. [If I understand correctly the egg remains an egg unless it had been fertilised by the rooster at the outset of its formation. Ed.] This agrees with the opinion of our sages at the beginning of tractate Beytzah 7 where the Talmud engages in scientific observations such as that when intercourse occurred by day the birth of the creature resulting from such intercourse will be born by day. In connection with the hatching of chicks, the Talmud is on record that when a certain person asked around who had the egg of a hen which had been laid by a live hen, they brought him instead the egg of a hen which had been slaughtered (before the egg was laid). The buyer went to Rabbi Ami demanding that the sale be annulled and his money be refunded as he had been tricked. His money was returned. Another incident related there refers to someone who specifically requested an egg from a hen which had been fertilised by a rooster. He was brought instead an egg from a hen which had absorbed the semen of the rooster through rolling around on the ground. He too complained to Rabbi Ami and had his money refunded after the egg failed to produce a chick. The sale was considered based on deception. It was understood that the condition attached by the buyer was clear evidence that he did not mean to eat the egg but to hatch it. Unless Rabbi Ami had thought that semen absorbed by the hen indirectly could not result in a chick being hatched, he had no reason to reverse that sale. 
    2) Some birds produce eggs through oral contact or mere “hugging” with their mates, there being no emission of semen by the male. [Rabbi Chavell refers the reader to an halachic responsum by Rabbi Mendel Kirshenbaum based on the Midrash to Proverbs 30,19: “the way of a man with a virgin.” Ed.] This would prove that the male semen does not form part of the fetus.
    3) Female fish produce eggs without ever having been in contact with their male counterparts. These eggs are subsequently sprinkled with male semen. The ones which absorb it hatch in due course, the ones which fail to be sprinkled with semen do not develop. This is a phenomenon we do not only find among the species of living creatures but it occurs all the time amongst the plants. When you take a male palm tree and you graft the branch of a female palm on to it, it becomes capable of producing fruit. The assumption is that the male provides a certain degree of warmth for the female to enable it to produce dates. These are the theories of the leading philosopher (Aristotele) on the subject, including a few of his proofs.
    The reason that when the woman performs her part in cohabitation with her husband first the result is a male child and the reverse, is very simple. If the woman has already contributed her part to the process the male semen is added last and as such will assert itself over the already present female part of the resulting embryo. If the male performs his part of the sexual act first this process is reversed and the female asserts its dominance over the semen already absorbed by the woman.
    If we want to understand this phenomenon more graphically, picture a field  which is being seeded. In our parable, the first drop of semen be it male or female, is compared to the soil of the field; the last drop of semen, be it male or female is compared to the grains of seed implanted in the soil of the field. We all know hat that which is contributed last determines the shape and appearance of the ultimate product which the earth produces. Therefore, if the male partner in the union of husband and wife contributes its part first it is like the seed, whereas if the female partner contributes its part first, it is like the soil. Whoever contributes his or her part last determines the nature of the product i.e. a male or female infant.
    An approach based on the approach of experts of natural science, i.e. that the man’s semen does not become part of the fetus at all. The statement that when the woman climaxes first the result is a male infant must be understood as follows: when the woman enjoys the warmth and embrace of her husband she concentrates so much on the image of her husband, the male, that this hastens her climax. The mental images she entertained during those moments leave an enduring imprint on the ovum which is fertilised so that a male infant will be born from that union. We have an example of such a result when Yaakov peeled the sticks near the watering troughs in Genesis 30,37. When the flocks became stimulated by the appearance of the white streaks or whatever, which Yaakov arranged to simulate the desired skin pattern he wanted these ewes to give birth to, the stratagem worked perfectly. The important thing was for the mating of these animals to take place while they had these images firmly in focus. There is no difference between the reaction of the males or the females of the species, and the same holds true in an even stronger degree when humans react to visual images of this kind. If even animals which react only instinctively, having no intelligence or power of imagination, react so strongly to such images, people do so even more.
    If someone is able to control his urges and wait with achieving his climax until after his wife has done so his reward will be that his wife will give birth to a male child. This is what the sages (compare Iggeret Hakodesh page 328 by Nachmanides, Chavell edition) referred to when they explained the meaning of Psalms 127,3: “sons are the provision of the Lord; the fruit of the womb, His reward.” The people so rewarded are the husbands who display patience while lying on their wives’ wombs giving their wives a chance to climax first.
    Some people offer an additional meaning for the words: “when a woman climaxes first she will bear male offspring;” they claim that the woman’s “semen” has a hidden power, i.e. the power of the male. [Just as we perceive of G’d’s attribute of Mercy, for instance, to harbour within it a small fraction of the attribute of  Justice, and vice versa,  so the whole concept of male and female, attributes which were united in one body before Chavah was separated from Adam, also each contains a minute part of its opposite. Ed.] Seeing that woman is a derivative of man, so to speak, it is no more than natural that a male child is a derivative of the female of the species. If woman climaxes first this means that she activated this potential male power within her, whereas the reverse is the case if man climaxes first. Having said this we realise that both man and woman have it within their power to recreate a complete set of human beings, a male and a female, “a complete building.”
    If we want to round out this picture, remember that the full name of G’d, the tetragram, does not appear in connection with the entire story of creation until after the creation of the human species. In their commentary on Genesis 2,2 and 2,4 וייצר י-ה-ו-ה אלו-הים את האדם, our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 13,3) remark cryptically: “a complete name of G’d applicable to a complete universe.” How is it possible to describe the universe as complete when woman had not yet been created? [we hear about Chavah becoming a separate body only in Genesis 2,22] The answer clearly is that Adam had been equipped with the female hormones, or whatever, to enable him to produce female offspring. This full name of the Lord is used again when G’d is described as building up the side He had removed from Adam into a separate human body, a female, i.e. Chavah. This conveys the idea that Chavah too has been equipped with the potential to reproduce either as male or female. In other words, each human being is theoretically able to determine the gender of the offspring it produces.
    We have a complete verse illustrating this concept in Genesis 46,15: אלה בני לאה אשר ילדה ליעקב בפדן ארם ואת דינה בתו כל נפש וגו’, “these were the sons of Leah whom she bore for Yaakov in Padan Aram, and Dinah his daughter; all the persons, etc.” The Torah attributes the male children to the mother and the female children to the father. When we said that the male harbours within him the essence of the female, and the female harbours with her the essence of the male, the meaning is not that as a result of such biological factors a woman can give birth to a female and a male to a male (each unassisted by the other). Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 14,9 have already said that  there is no barber who can shave himself, i.e. man or woman each require a partner of the opposite sex in order to perform the act of procreation.
    A Midrashic approach to our verse (based on Tanchuma Tazria 3): the words אשה כי תזריע mean that when the woman initiates and climaxes first וילדה זכר, she will give birth to a male child. By inference, when the man climaxes first she will give birth to a female child. This is borne out by the words ואם נקבה תלד, (in connection with the birth of a male child the Torah described a dual process, i.e. climax and birth; when describing the birth of a female child no mention is made of the woman climaxing.)
    Miracles are performed by G’d with this infant (before it is born).When a person is locked up in a jail for even a single day his entire personality yearns to be set free. The fetus, a human being at some stage, is locked up inside the womb of a woman for nine months and G’d protects it there during the entire period. Rabbi Meir elaborates explaining that during the entire nine months the fetus draws blood from its mother whereas as soon as it is born this blood is transformed into milk and the baby starts nursing from its mother’s breast.
    An intellectual approach to our verse: man experiences three different worlds in the course of his existence. He experiences the first such world while he is within his mother’s womb; during this stage man begins to develop and to admire the wondrous ways of his Creator and the greatness of His works. Concerning this stage of man’s development David has said in Psalms 139,15: “My frame was not concealed from You while I was being shaped in a hidden place, knit together in the recesses of the earth.” He had already referred to this phenomenon earlier in verse 14 of the same psalm when he said: “I praise You for I am awesomely, wondrously made; Your work is wonderful.” David was speaking about all the wonderful ways required for G’d to produce a sophisticated creature such as man. 
    The men of the Great Assembly who perfected the liturgy of the daily prayers for us already acknowledged all this when they bade us recite every morning the words: אשר יצר את האדם בחכמה וברא בו נקבים, וג’, “Who has fashioned man with wisdom and provided him with numerous orifices any one of which if not functioning correctly would prove fatal to him” [loosely translated. Ed.]. The signature of this short prayer concludes with ומפליא לעשות, “and doing wonders.” Considerations of this nature prompted Solomon to write in Kohelet 11,5: “Just as you do not know how the lifebreath passes into the limbs within the womb of the pregnant woman, so you cannot foresee the actions of G’d, who causes all things to happen.” in other words, all of G’d’s works are of a mysterious miraculous nature. Solomon simply uses as an example something we are aware of and familiar with to illustrate a principle which operates throughout the universe. Just as it is beyond our understanding to understand how something spiritual is introduced into the womb, so it is beyond our understanding to understand the workings of G’d’s השגחה, benevolent supervision of what goes on in His universe, and how His designs in it can be assured despite our freedom of choice. 
    Concerning this part of the cosmos and the mysterious ways in which G’d operates within it, Job says (Job 10,9-11): “consider that You fashioned me like clay; will You then turn me into dust? You poured me out like milk, congealed me like cheese; You clothed me with skin and flesh and wove me of bones and sinews.” Job referred to the world in which man spends a strictly limited time, nine months plus a few days at the outside. In that part of his world man is devoid of intelligence and knowledge and is not exposed to external pressures. He would be quite content to remain within this mini-cosmos for all his life seeing that all his needs are taken care of without his having to lift a finger, were it not for the fact that he has no control over being born into a larger cosmos. This is what our sages in Avot (end of fourth chapter) referred to when they said: “man is born against his will.”
    No wonder man cries at the moment of birth seeing that he leaves behind such an ideal existence. This is merely an indication that the world the baby is born into is one full of pain, disappointments, and confusion. Man had been transferred from the world in which he was formed into the second world he experiences during his existence, this present terrestrial universe. He does have certain advantages compared to the world he has left behind when he left his mother’s womb. In this world as a general rule man’s intellect grows more or less apace with the development of his body. His wisdom keeps increasing until he becomes wise as a result of having studied the Torah and performed its commandments. As a by-product of all this he acquires a degree of understanding of the workings of G’d, his Creator. In spite of all this, man’s stay in this present terrestrial world is of very limited duration, as a rule not exceeding eighty years. When he dies, i.e. is removed from this life, this also occurs against his will, and this has prompted the sages in Avot 4 which we quoted already as commenting on our involuntary birth to say that our death is equally involuntary. Had man been asked about his preference, the chances are that he would have opted to live on earth forever.
    
    From this terrestrial universe man is transferred to the third world he will experience, i.e. the world known as עולם הבא, “the world to come,” the world of the future. There are no limitations of time in that world. The delights enjoyed in that world are not transient. In that world man is compensated for all the good deeds he has performed while on earth. Considering all that we have described, it is clear that man progresses in an ascending manner from one world to the next, from good to better to best. The first world man lives in is dark. The second world man lives in is illuminated by two luminaries, the sun and the moon. In the third world man will attain is full of unbounded brilliant light. That world knows no boundaries and no darkness.
    Solomon alludes to all these three worlds in a single verse (Kohelet 7,1) when he says: “a good name is better than fragrant oil, and the day of death than the day of birth.” This verse has to be understood in the following manner: “the treasures” i.e. accumulated merits man acquired while alive on earth, and  in store for him in the celestial regions are superior to even the most fragrant oils on earth; oil, i.e. body-oil for rubbing, is perceived as a means to make the body feel good and to enhance the quality of life on earth. Solomon says that what is in store for the soul in the world to come is better than the best of what the body can experience here on earth. He also uses the word “oil” as a commodity similar to “money,” saying that all the money in this world cannot compete with the spiritual treasures in the next world. His meaning is similar to that in Proverbs 21,20: “precious treasure and oil are in the house of the wise man.”
    The words: “and the day of death is better than the day of his birth,” mean that that day is better than the world the fetus spent in his mother’s womb. Solomon’s point is that just as the terrestrial world is superior to the fetus’ existence within the womb of his mother, so the world to come is superior to life on terrestrial earth. That life is the follow-up of death in the world of the womb. In other words, leaving behind the life in the womb, “dying” from it, is an improvement on what went before; similarly leaving behind life on this earth ushers in an even better life for the person concerned, hence “the day of death is better than the day of entry into that life which one leaves behind.” Solomon follows the principle that phenomena with which we are familiar, i.e. life in the womb and life on earth and their relative pleasures provide us with a clue to what is ahead and has not yet been experienced.
   וטמאה שבעת ימים, “as a result she will remain in a state of ritual impurity for seven days.” It is G’d’s decree that just as the state of impurity lasts for seven days, the purification rites require seven days. The number “seven” applies equally to days of impurity, days of purification, days of joy (after a wedding or the duration of certain festivals) and days of mourning.
   כימי נדת דותה תטמא, “her impurity is as long as her impurity due to menstruation.” The expression דותה is derived from מדוה, a description of a “natural” sickness, i.e. the menstruation period a woman experiences at regular intervals. Our sages (Niddah 9) have also explained that during such a period a woman’s heads and limbs feel very heavy. Although the excretion of blood by the woman every month is the excretion of superfluous material, it is still considered a disease. The word נדה means to “be distant;” similarly the word מנודה is a term for people who have been ostracised, banished and banned from society. The term is used in Nedarim 4 in connection with someone vowing to not benefit from certain people’s belongings or eating a meal at their place, or not to come within 4 cubits of the property of such a person.
    The reason a menstruous woman is referred to as נדה is that other people shun her, keep their distance from her while she is in the throes of that disease. Even her women friends keep their distance from her. She usually spends that period in isolation. Throughout ancient history all the nations considered that period in a woman’s monthly cycle as one requiring her to be isolated, even considering the earth a woman in such circumstances walked on as contaminated. One did not speak to such a woman for fear of being contaminated. When Lavan wanted to search Rachel’s tent and she apologised for not rising in his honour (she was sitting on the teraphim her father was searching for) we note that Lavan did not speak a single word to her. This was because it was considered unhealthy to engage in conversation with a menstruating woman. Clearly, Rachel was sitting isolated in her tent, presumably without any maidservant at her side. The exhalations of such a woman and the odours coming from her were all considered potentially contaminating (compare Genesis 31,34-35). [Halachah, of course, does not recognise such superstitions and in the main a woman’s state of being נדה affects her husband’s relations with her and her inability to touch sacred objects including food for sacred purposes which she would contaminate by her touch. Ed.] According to Nachmanides even what such a woman looked at was considered as harmful, similarly to the evil eye. (Nachmanides on Leviticus 18,19 reports that when a menstruous woman in the very beginning of her period looks at a gleaming sword or mirror, drops of blood can be seen on that sword or mirror according to the eye witness reports of some “scientists.”) It is clear that if even some of all this is true cohabiting with a woman while she is in that state is a health hazard to her partner.
    
    12,3. וביום השמיני ימול, “and on the eighth day he shall be circumcised.” The word ביום means that even if that day happens to be a Sabbath circumcision is to be performed (Shabbat 131). This holds true only when one can be absolutely certain that the Sabbath is indeed the eighth day after the baby’s birth. When there is any doubt about this, such as the baby being born after sunset but before dark, the circumcision is postponed as we do no desecrate the Sabbath unless we are sure thereby to comply with the Torah’s instructions. The Talmud Shabbat 137 states that an infant may legally be circumcised (earliest opportunity) either on the eighth, the ninth, the tenth, the eleventh or the twelfth day of his life. He must not be circumcised sooner, and unless sick and weak not later (on pain of neglecting performance of a positive commandment incumbent on the father). If the baby has been born clearly during the day or night and is healthy he is to be circumcised on the eighth day. If he was born during dusk he is to be circumcised one day later providing that day is neither Sabbath or festival. If he is born at dusk on Friday he is to be circumcised on Sunday, i.e. the tenth day. If the Sabbath is followed by a festival such as Passover or Tabernacles his circumcision takes place on Monday, i.e. the eleventh day. If the Sabbath is followed by New Year, he is circumcised on the twelfth day of his life, i.e. on the Tuesday following New Year. If the baby was sick, circumcision is postponed until after he is well again.
    
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Tazria 5). The wicked Roman governor Turnusrufus once asked Rabbi Akiva whose works were more beautiful (beneficial to mankind) G’d’s or man’s? Rabbi Akiva answered that man’s accomplishments were superior. Turnusrufus, [taken aback by the unexpected answer, Ed.] countered: “can man then create heaven and earth that you say man’s accomplishments are greater than G’d’s?” Rabbi Akiva answered: “do not speak to me of matters which are above earth or below earth (beyond the human habitat), but let us discuss only matters within man’s province. Thereupon Turnusrufus asked Rabbi Akiva: “why do you people perform the rites of circumcision?” Rabbi Akiva said: “did I not know that this was the question which really troubled you! This is precisely why I told you right away that man’s accomplishments on earth are greater than G’d’s.” Rabbi Akiva proceeded to illustrate his point and brought Turnusrufus both ears of corns and hot rolls. He pointed to the former, saying “this is G’d’s work;” then he pointed to the rolls and said: “this is man’s work!.” Turnusrufus then said: “if your G’d is so desirous of the male infant being circumcised why did He not arrange for it to be born this way?” To this Rabbi Akiva replied: “why does the baby’s navel get born with it, trailing behind, so that its mother has to sever it?” As to your question why the infant is not born without a foreskin, the reason is that G’d gave us His commandments in order to refine human beings through their observance. This is the meaning of Proverbs 30,5: “every word of G’d is meant to purify.”
    
    12,4. ושלושים יום ושלושת ימים, “and for the thirty-three days following, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text the 33 days of purification were decreed to combine with the seven days of impurity in order to complete a cycle of forty days. The fetus required forty days after its mother conceived to become something in its own right.
    A kabbalistic approach: The thirty-three days given to the woman (during which she cannot halachically become a menstruant) were given to her as corresponding to the bride in Song of Songs who is viewed as possessing the thirty-two paths of wisdom. She is presumed to join these thirty-two paths thus  making a total of thirty-three [the concept of אחותי כלה “the bride is my sister,” (Song of Songs 4,10)  means in kabbalistic terms that “wisdom is my sister,” i.e. [I attach myself to wisdom as one is attached to one’s sister.” Ed.] the כלה is perceived as “carrying,” supporting these thirty-two paths of wisdom.
   תשב, “she will sit, etc.” Rashi explains that the word תשב is not to be understood in its literal sense, i.e. that this woman has to remain seated; the meaning is that during these thirty-three days she may remain in the immediate vicinity of her husband without having to worry about contracting ritual impurity issuing from her body. The word תשב in the sense of remaining in a location for an extended period is found  in Deut. 1,46: ”you dwelt in Kadesh for many years.” The meaning of the whole verse then is as follows: “she will have to wait for 33 days before being allowed to touch sacred things without contaminating them, and she must not enter the Sanctuary. This in spite of the fact that as far as her husband is concerned she is ritually pure and is allowed to cohabit with him.” 
    Nachmanides understands the word תשב in this instance as referring to marital relations, similar to Hoseah 3,3 ימים רבים תשבי לי ולא תזני ולא תהיי לאיש, “you are to go for a long time without sexual intercourse or marrying.” Any woman living with her husband and having normal relations with him is called יושבת לו. Seeing that the Torah had referred to the first seven days after her giving birth as days during which she was suffering a ritual impurity similar to that of a menstruous woman, the Torah had to contrast her status during the following 33 days with her previous status.
    Maimonides in Sefer Kedushah, Issurey Biah 11,15 writes in a similar vein. These are his words: “the fact that you find in some places (books) and in some responsa of the gaonim that a woman must not cohabit with her husband for forty days after having given birth to a male child, and not for 80 days after having given birth to a female child even though she had not seen any blood from her normal source of blood during all those days, is an unacceptable practice based on an error. This error has crept into their writings through their copying something from the Sadducees. It is  a duty to disabuse scholars of such an error so that they no longer practice heretical practices introduced by the Sadducees. We must ensure that the rulings of the sages that the woman has to count only seven days after giving birth to a male child before being able to cohabit with her husband are upheld.”
   בדמי טהרה, “in the blood of her purification.” The words mean that such blood is ritually pure. The expression is used by the Torah to contrast this blood with blood issuing forth from a menstruous woman. Ibn Ezra wrote that G’d decreed that the number of days such a state of affairs continues for the male child is shorter because it takes forty days for the embryo to gain some substance, for its major components to become recognisable within the womb. In the case of a female fetus this development requires twice as much time, i.e. 80 days. This is why there is a residue of ritual impurity for eighty days
    Our sages (majority view, not the opinion of Rabbi Yishmael in Niddah 30, on which Ibn Ezra based himself) hold that the time for a male or female fetus to develop is identical. According to their opinion the reason why the Torah legislated twice the amount of time for both impurity and partial impurity in the case of a female baby being born is that the female is cold and wet and as a result the mother needs more time to recover from the birth of a female baby. [An alternative reason offered also by Rabbi Dr. D. Hoffman is that the Torah may have wanted the mother to be pure at the time her son would be circumcised. This act, in turn, would hasten the progress of her recovery so that all traces of impurity disappear already at the end of forty days. Ed.]
    
    12,7. וכפר עליה, “and atone for her, etc.” The word כפרה, “atonement,” is never used except when applicable to a sin. This is why the very institution of the sin-offering which the woman who has given birth has to bring strikes one as just as unique as that which the Torah demanded of the Nazir, the person who voluntarily abstained from wine, grape-associated products, and impurity (Numbers 6,14). What sin did the woman commit at the time she gave birth that the Torah should impose upon her the need to offer a sin-offering? If this sacrifice were meant to express her gratitude that she was saved from the danger attending every birth, the Torah should have prescribed that she bring a קרבן תודה, a thanksgiving offering! Why demand that she bring a sin-offering?
    It is possible to understand the  reason for this offering as not so much related to her as to her “mother,” i.e. the first woman Chavah, who had committed the first sin as a result of which all women subsequently had to endure painful deliveries, pains of menstruation, separation from their husbands, etc. Had Chavah not been guilty of introducing disobedience to G’d’s command women would have been spared all this. The whole process of giving birth would have remained as natural a process as for trees to yield their fruit. Trees do not have to experience desire in order to become fertilised and to yield their fruit year after year. This woman who gave birth now may be perceived as the branch of a contaminated root, daughter of a corrupted mother and as such some of the mother’s contamination was transmitted to her. Hence the Torah requires that she atones for this by bringing a sin-offering after giving birth. By doing so she does her part in helping to atone for the original sin of Chavah.
    In fact, we find that we are taught in Shabbat 31 that women have been commanded to observe three commandments specifically to help undo the spiritual damage caused to the species of man by their original “mother.” They are 1) the observance of a state of impurity with subsequent purification during their regular menstruation cycles. 2) חלה, the separating (and while the Temple was standing giving to the Priest) of the first part of any dough they bake from the five species of grain (Numbers 15,20-21), and 3) the lighting of the Shabbat candles every Friday night. [The last two commandments devolve on the male when there is no woman at hand. Ed.] In fact, according to the Talmud there, failure to observe these three commandments meticulously may result in their dying during childbirth. Seeing that that particular sin was preceded by the sinful thought before it was actually carried out, the woman offers both a burnt-offering and a sin-offering after giving birth; the first offering atones for the sinful thought and the second for the sinful deed (compare verse 5). This is the reason the Torah wrote of the requirement for the woman to bring a burnt-offering before mentioning the need for her to bring a sin-offering. In all other instances where the sin-offering has to be brought on account of a sin committed by the person bringing the offering, the Torah demands that he first cleanse himself spiritually by atoning for the deed before bringing the burnt-offering.
    When the Talmud Zevachim 90 states that when the Torah wrote the words אחד לעולה ואחד לחטאת, “one as a burnt-offering and one as a sin-offering,” (verse 8)  that the actual presentation of these two offerings does not follow the order in which the two offerings are listed here, this supports our contention that  the reason the Torah reversed the order in which the legislation is written is meant to teach us the lesson we mentioned, i.e. that the sinful intention preceded Chavah’s eating of the fruit of that tree, i.e. the offering we speak of here was not in penitence for an unintentional inadvertently committed sin as are most other sin-offerings.
    According to the opinion of our sages (Niddah 31) the reason for the sin-offering the mother has to bring is that she presumably was guilty of swearing off marital relations with her husband seeing that the experience of giving birth was so painful and the pregnancy so uncomfortable. Her offering atones for such a lapse on her part. Seeing her oath at the time was due to her being in pain, and she is not a free agent allowed to deny her husband his marital rights, she has committed a culpable sin, i.e. she needs to atone with a burnt-offering for her sinful intent.
    
    13,1. אדם כי יהיה בעור בשרו שאת או ספחת או בהרת, “if a person will have on the skin of his flesh a s’eis, a sapachat or baheret, etc.” We have learned in Nega-im 1,1 that there are four different-looking separate categories of skin-afflictions called נגע צרעת, the respective colour being called שאת and its derivatives, בהרת and its derivatives; these derivatives are known as בהרת עזה כשלג, the strongest symptom, white like snow; a slightly lesser degree of בהרת than the snow-like colour characterising the original בהרת, is like the colour of the whitewash used when one paints the outside of a house, a still less pronounced white comparable to white wool, known as בהרת כצמר, and a still paler kind of skin discolouration known as בהרת כקרום ביצה, “like the shell of an egg.” The word ספחת describes a skin disorder which is a cross between שאת and בהרת related to the expression ספחני נא אל אחת הכהנות, “please assign to me one (share) of the priestly duties, etc.,” or Samuel I 26,19 מהסתפח בנחלת ה’, “so that I cannot have a share in the Lord’s possession.” The word denotes a combination of at least two components.
    The various appearances of the skin disorders are not considered the dreaded צרעת; they are symptoms which often are the forerunners of צרעת. This is why the Torah decrees isolation for people displaying these symptoms at once so that in the event the צרעת does develop no one associated with them could have been contaminated by them. This is the reason why physicians have described בהרת as something inducing fear of צרעת in people (Nachmanides). When the Torah speaks here of נגע צרעת, the meaning is that these symptoms are the ones preceding צרעת but not necessarily. These symptoms by themselves do not yet constitute the affliction known as צרעת. If, after a period of isolation, additional symptoms develop, such as described in the Torah in the verses following, the result will be the disease called צרעת. This is why the Torah describes the result of such a development as צרעת היא (verses 8), as opposed to נגע צרעת הוא in verse 3. Whenever the latter expression is used the skin disorder described is not yet a true צרעת.
    The idea is that the symptoms are already those of an affliction, נגע, and the words וראהו הכהן וטמא אותו, “the priest is to inspect it and to declare such a person as ritually impure,” mean that this declaration takes effect immediately as it is presumed certain that such symptoms will develop into “the real thing,” i.e. צרעת.  The words נגע הוא “it is an affliction,” mean that it is large enough to convince the priest that it will develop  and spread to larger areas of the skin-surface. Thus far Nachmanides on the subject. The symptoms described by the Torah as פשיון “enlargement of the afflicted area,” שער לבן, “white hair growing inside the afflicted area,” מחיה, “an appearance like raw flesh, not covered by skin,” עומק העור an illusion that the skin is “deeper,” recessed in the afflicted areas, all these are symptoms which indicate the presence of ritual impurity and are the criteria according to which the inspecting priest has to make his decision. Generally, such symptoms mean that the person so afflicted is ritually impure and has to leave the camp.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Tazria 9): Why has this paragraph not been introduced by the customary: “speak to the Children of Israel; if a person has such and such symptoms, etc.?” The absence of this introductory formula is to teach you that it is not the Lord who initiates afflictions as we know from Psalms 5,5 כי לא אל חפץ רשע אתה לא יגורך רע, ”for You are not a G’d who desires wickedness, evil cannot abide with You;” David does not belabour the obvious; he speaks about G’d having no desire to  make any creature guilty of anything. We have proof of this also in Ezekiel 33,11: “as true as I am alive, says the Lord, G’d, I do not desire the death of the wicked.” On the contrary, what is it that G’d desires? He wants to find an excuse to justify His creatures’ actions as we know from Isaiah 42,21: ה’ חפץ למען צדקו יגדיל תורה ויאדיר, ”The Lord desires His creatures’ vindication, that He may magnify and glorify (His) Teaching.” If our paragraph had commenced in the normal way some people might have misunderstood and thought that G’d derives satisfaction from having to afflict people even though they were guilty of something. 
    Another comment by the Midrash: the words “evil does not abide with You” which we quoted from Psalms 5,5 mean that the name of G’d is not associated with events of an evil nature but only with things positive. When G’d created light and darkness, He did associate His name with the light but not with the darkness. In Genesis 1,5 the Torah writes: “G’d called the light day, and the darkness He called night.” When G’d blessed the first pair of human beings, His name was associated with the blessing for both of them, as the Torah writes (Genesis 1,28: “G’d blessed them.” On the other hand, when G’d decreed a curse on man, (Genesis 3,16) The Torah writes: “to the woman He had said, etc.,” and we find similar language in connection with the penalty decreed on Adam. The Torah writes (Genesis 3,17): “and to Adam He had said, etc.” You may ask that when G’d cursed the serpent we also find this kind of language, i.e. (Genesis 3,14) “the Lord G’d had said to the serpent, ‘because you have done this, etc.’” Our sages answered this query in Tanchuma Tazria 9 by saying that there are indeed three occasions when G’d did associate His name with something evil, such as a curse. The first instance  is the case of the מסית, someone who seduces others to worship idols; the first personification of such a seducer was the serpent who seduced Chavah in Gan Eden saying to her: “G’d knows that on the day you (pl) will eat from the tree your eyes will be opened and you will become just like G’d” (Genesis 3,5). The serpent implied that just as G’d had created worlds so she and Adam would be able to create worlds; the serpent implied that G’d had forbidden eating the fruit because He was jealous of potential competition. The serpent implied that just as a skilled craftsman is anxious not to reveal the secrets of his craft, so G’d wanted to keep the secret of how He had created the universe. Seeing that the serpent had used G’d’s name in its seduction of Chavah, G’d in turn associated His name with the punishment, the curse.
    The second instance of G’d’s name being associated with something evil concerns people who deliberately transgress the decrees of the sages whose authority has been given to them by G’d and has been confirmed at Mount Gerizim. The prophet Jeremiah referred to the fact that such people are guilty of death when he wrote in Jeremiah 11,3: “Thus said the Lord: cursed be the man who will not obey the terms of this covenant which I enjoined your fathers when I freed them from Egypt, etc.” The sin of these people is that they place their trust in man instead of in G’d as the prophet said in Jeremiah 17,5: “Thus said the Lord: ‘cursed is he who trusts in man, who makes a mere flesh his strength and turns his thoughts from the Lord.’” In other words, when does the curse mentioned earlier apply? When someone turns his heart away from the Lord. When Noach blessed his sons Shem and Yaphet, he used the name of G’d in his blessing, saying: ברוך ה’ אלו-הי שם, “blessed be the Lord, the G’d of Shem,” etc. When he cursed Canaan (Genesis 9,26) he simply said: ארור כנען, “cursed be Canaan;” he did not mention G’d in that context. When the prophet Elisha prayed to G’d asking for deliverance from the Arameans (enemy of the Israelites at that time, Kings II 6,17) he invoked the name of the Lord in his prayer saying: “Lord open his eyes let him see” (a reference to his attendant who was afraid). When he then turned to cursing the Arameans (verse 18 of the same chapter), Elisha only said: ”please strike these people with a blinding light.” The name of G’d was not invoked in the prayer to bring a curse upon them. Even when the Israelites were sinful, G’d referred to them with respect and honour. When G’d legislated the kind of animals which were to be offered by the Israelites, -when, where and under what circumstances,- the legislation is introduced with the words: “if one of you wishes to offer a sacrifice to the Lord, etc.” When introducing the צרעת legislation, however, the name of G’d does not appear. Clearly, even when the legislation presupposes sins by the afflicted, the Torah still does not wish to involve G’d directly, as the One who initiates the “curse.” This is why the verse starts merely with the words: “when someone develops a white spot on the skin of his flesh, etc.”
    What sins cause such afflictions? In retribution for illicit sex. (Tanchuma Tazria 11) This is also what happened in Jerusalem whose inhabitants were struck by this disease because their sexual mores had deteriorated so much (Isaiah 3,16) ”because the daughters of Zion are so vain and walk with their heads thrown back, with roving eyes, and with mincing gait, making a tingling with their feet...the Lord will uncover their heads.” The word used there is שפח which is the equivalent of צרעת as we know from Leviticus 14,5.
    The words אדם כי יהיה בעור בשרו שאת או ספחת, are equivalent to what we read n Chabakuk 1,7 איום ונורא ממננו ושפתו ושאתו יצא, “they are terrible and dreadful; they make their own laws and are overbearing.” The prophet speaks about Adam who was the direct creation of G’d, created in His likeness, who was composed of particles from all the corners of the globe and whose dominion before his sin therefore extended over all parts of the globe. At that time Adam was able to see with his eyes from one end of the earth to the other. Adam’s wife, Chavah was created from his very body, she who caused his mortality. Seeing that she gave Adam to eat from the fruit of the tree of knowledge she made him mortal.
    Another Midrashic explanation: The words “terrible and dreadful” which we quoted from Chabakuk refer to Pharaoh who ruled over the whole earth as we know from Psalms 105,20. The words: “they make their own laws, etc.” refer to Moses who grew up in the very house of this wicked Pharaoh and eventually deprived him of his rule after bringing ten plagues upon him. Moses used to take a look at his holy staff to see which kind of plague was appropriate to smite Pharaoh with; he would then inflict this plague upon him; hence the prophet speaks about something “terrible and dreadful.”
    Yet another interpretation of that verse in Chabakuk relates the adjectives in that verse to the principal characteristics of the four host nations who had control of the Jewish people in exile at different times. [The Midrash broadens its perspective of allegorical meanings; the interested reader is referred to the original text seeing that our author does not contribute to the understanding of this Midrash  except quoting its text. Ed.]
    The reason that this whole subject has been written in the Torah adjacent to the paragraph dealing with the purification rites prescribed for a woman who has given birth is to remind us that whoever is not mindful of the regulations pertaining to her ritual impurity connected with menstruation is apt to become a victim of these skin-disorders. We find an opinion in medical textbooks confirmed by our sages (Tanchuma Metzorah 1) that when someone cohabits with a woman who is in the first day of her menstruation, any baby born from that union will be afflicted with צרעת for the first ten years of its life. If the cohabitation occurred on the second day of her being menstruous this צרעת would last for twenty years, etc. If cohabitation occurs on the seventh day of the woman’s being menstruous the offspring from such a union will remain afflicted for seventy years. We learn from all this that the order in which the Torah writes certain paragraphs and subject matter is not haphazard but has deeper meaning which it is worthwhile to explore seeing that each paragraph conveys a meaning based solely on its position in the Torah over and above its other meanings. Profound study of the text of the Torah reveals what wonderful insights into the workings of nature the Torah displays.
    
    13,3. וראה הכהן את הנגע, “The priest shall look at the skin disorder, etc.” We are taught in Nega-im 1,4 that the priest must not inspect the symptoms for the first time on the first day of the week as it will be necessary to isolate the afflicted person for seven days. Seeing that the Torah writes in verse six that the priest is to inspect the symptoms again on the seventh day and it is not permitted to do son on the Sabbath, this means that the first inspection must not take place on Sunday. By the same token, the first inspection must not take place on a Monday as in the event a third inspection is necessary, the second time the seventh day would occur on the Sabbath. This is why the sages said that when the Torah speaks about 2 weeks (a second series of seven days) this means that the seventh day is counted as part of either week, i.e. the two weeks actually comprise only thirteen days.
   ושער בנגע הפך לבן ומראה הנגע עמוק מעור בשרו, “and the skin disorder appears to be deeper than the skin of the flesh,” Rashi explains that whenever the Torah speaks of “a deeper white appearance” this is to be understood as similar to the contrast between the appearance of sunny areas surrounded by shade which also appears to be “lower,” or “deeper” than the surrounding shaded area although in fact it is not.
    Nachmanides writes as follows concerning this verse: “there is a whitish looking substance which sparkles and affects one’s eyes as if one were being blinded by sunshine.” The human eye is unable to tolerate this brightness; this is why it appears to be “deeper,” recessed. The reason why the eye can tolerate the brilliance of sunshine is that it has a black area (pupil) which “absorbs” that brilliance. The pupil of the eye does not however, absorb the shine or sparkle emitted from this whitish material of which the Torah speaks here. Seeing it does not absorb it, it “rejects” it, i.e. it appears more distant than it is in actual fact. This is what the Torah means when it speaks about the appearance of this whitish mass appearing as “deeper” than the skin around it.
    The whitish mass associated with the affliction called בהרת which is as bright as snow will become dimmed when exposed to sunlight, provided it will not sprout a black hair in its midst. If it does produce a black hair this is a sign that the affliction will not heal but will spread, as the black hair strengthens the ability to see.
   שאת, on the other hand, while also a whitish looking mass, is not as blinding as the snow-like whiteness of the brightest בהרת. It does not weaken the ability of the afflicted person to see and as a result to expand. When one approaches to inspect it, it appears close by, “elevated instead of recessed,” similar to the impression one has when looking at the stars in the sky. The stars appear to protrude against the black sky “behind” them.”
    
    13,5. והנה הנגע עמד בעיניו, “and here the skin-disorder remained in its (previous) colour and condition.” The word בעיניו means “in its appearance.” The word עין is used in a similar meaning when the Torah describes the appearance of the manna in Numbers 11,7 where the wording is ועינו כעין הבדולח, “and its appearance was like the appearance of crystal.” It was similar in appearance to what is described in Ezekiel 1,22 as the קרח הנורא, the “awesome ice.”
    On the other hand, Torat Kohanim based on Sifra Tazria 13,37 derives from the wording of the text that if the Torah had not written these words I would have thought that only the officiating priest at the first inspection but not that priest’s son or student would be entitled to undertake this inspection. Hence the Torah wrote בעיניו that if initially several priests had inspected the symptoms and most feel that there had been no change their opinion is accepted. (based on verse 37 in this chapter where the word בעיניו occurs again and cannot have the same meaning as in verse 5, hence it must mean “in his eyes.”) Accordingly, the correct translation of our verse here would be: “if in the eyes of the priest already mentioned there had not been any change in the skin disorder he had inspected previously, etc., then this priest shall quarantine the afflicted person for a second period of seven days.” The expression בעיני in that context is one frequently used in Mishnaic Hebrew such as in Baba Kama 41 כך אני בעיניך “so I appear in your eyes,” Or Kings II 1,13 תיקר נא נפשי בעיניך, “may my life be precious in your eyes” (the captain of fifty to the prophet Elijah pleading for his life). The principal message of the words is that the priest does not use measuring devices to determine if the skin disorder had spread but he relies on his eyes to estimate the state of affairs.
    
    13,10. והיא הפכה שער לבן, “and it has changed hair to white,” according to Sifra Nega-im 3,6 the Torah speaks of 2 hairs or more. The reason that white hair in that area is a sign of ritual impurity is simply that according to nature these hairs are normally black. If there is a deviation from what is natural this is an indication of something being diseased.
    
   ומחית בשר חי בשאת, ”or there is live flesh within the area covered by שאת;” the letter ו at the beginning of the word ומחית does not mean “and,” but “or.” There is no need for both white hair and raw flesh within that area in order for the priest to declare the afflicted person as definitively impure. Verse eight had already told us that white hair by itself suffices for the priest to make such a ruling. Similarly, the raw flesh within the afflicted area is enough of a symptom by itself for the priest to declare such a person as ritually impure, i.e. מצורע, definitely afflicted by the disease known as צרעת. Sifra Nega-im 3,7 provides a measurement for the size of this raw flesh in order for the priest to rule it as making its victim impure. If the size is sufficient for two white hairs to be accommodated on that surface it is large enough. You should know that wherever we find a white hair which is partially black we rule according to the colour of the hair where it emerges from the follicle. If the hair is black at that point it is deemed to be a black hair (Maimonides Hilchot Tumat Tzoraat 2,1).
    
    13,30. נתק הוא, “it is a scall.” This kind of tzoraat is so named as the hair has been removed from that spot. The word is used in halachah for certain commandments which are considered as separated, literally “torn away” from where they belong (Chulin 141) [when a negative commandment appears in the guise of a positive commandment it is considered as לאו הניתק לעשה, “a negative commandment couched in terms of a positive commandment”. As a result, generally speaking, the penalty normally applicable when violating a negative commandment does not apply in such a case. Ed.] The expression נתק also occurs in Joshua 4,18 in connection with the priests who carried the Holy Ark into and across the Jordan. The text says נתקו כפות רגלי הכהנים, “the soles of the feet of the priests were separated, pulled, etc.”
    After the original hair had been pulled out, if subsequently the new hair is blond, thin, this is a sign of ritual impurity (contamination caused by the disease). The bald spot conta-minates either by blond (yellow) hair or expansion of the afflicted area. (Nega-im 10,1). If, however the hair which grows back from that follicle is black, this is a sign that the affliction has healed and the priest can declare such a person as ritually pure (after he has undergone the necessary procedures).
    
    13,44. טמא הוא, טמא יטמאנו הכהן, “he is ritually impure, the priest has to declare him as impure.”  In verse 37 in  a parallel situation the Torah used similar syntax writing טהור הוא, וטהרו הכהן, “he is ritually pure, and the priest shall declare him as ritually pure.” From both of these verses we learn that even though the priest has observed unmistakable signs of either purity or impurity it is essential for him to confirm this by saying so. We have been taught at the end of the first chapter of the Tossephta of Nega-im that this was one of the reasons that prompted Hillel to return to the land of Israel from Babylon. He wanted to make certain that these procedures are understood and followed to the letter. He moved to Israel in order to explain the reasons for these rules to the local Rabbinical authorities.
    
    13,45. והצרוע אשר בו הנגע בגדיו יהיו פרומים וראשו יהיה פרוע ועל שפם יעטה, “and the person afflicted with the tzoraat,- his garments shall be torn, the hair of his head shall remain unshorn, and he shall cloak himself up to his lips.” According to Midrash Eycha Rabbati (introduction) the word הצרוע may be understood as a reference to the Temple (after its destruction); the words אשר בו הנגע may be understood as idolatry which contaminates in a manner similar to the skin affliction. The words בגדיו יהיו פרומים are a reference to the priestly garments (their condition after the Temple had been destroyed); the words וראשו יהיה פרוע are a reference to the Shechinah which has departed from the Temple Mount; the words ועל שפם יעטה refer to the neglect of Torah study and observance which was also a by- product of the loss of the Temple and political independence. The use of the words טמא twice in the verse mean that it speaks of the destruction of both the first and the second Temple.
    
    13,47. בבגד צמר או בבגד פשתים, On a woolen or linen garment.” Our sages (Nega-im 11,2) explained that only the wool of animals which are pure can confer the impurity of a person afflicted with tzoraat on others. The wool of an unclean animal such as the camel cannot confer such impurity. If the garment in question is made up of a number of fabrics including wool from a pure animal as well as wool from a ritually impure animal, if the dominant portion of the garment was made from wool of a pure animal it does transfer such impurity; if not, it does not.
    
    13,49. או בכל כלי עור, “or in a leather utensil;” our sages explain that this excludes coloured vessels. utensils or garments. The main practical significance of this statement is that wool or linen confer the wearer’s impurity only when they are in the original white colour. The rules applying to dyed wool garments also apply to dyed leather utensils.
    13,52. “The fabric under discussion or the garment made from this fabric which has been contaminated has to be burned.” According to Nachmanides the repeated use of the words בגד, שתי, ערב, עור are all reminders of the miraculous connection between the afflicted person’s sins and the state of health of his garments or basic utensils. G’d, as it were, reminds him gently to mend his ways so that He would not have to take stronger action. [Needless to add that the premise is that as a rule Israeli society observed all of G’d’s commandments and only a very few individuals experienced such afflictions to their clothing. In a corrupt society these afflictions would become so commonplace as to lose their educational value. Ed.]
    
    13,58. והבגד או השתי או הערב או כל כלי העור אשר תכבס וסר מהם הנגע, “but if the garment, or the warp or the woof or any leather utensil which has been washed and then the affliction left them, etc.” The Torah mentioned already in verses 56-57 that a garment on which a nega tzoraat had been identified and that stain had dimmed after washing the area afflicted, has to be ripped out. If however, the stain appears to grow, the whole garment has to be burned. If the stain has been removed through washing it, the garment must then be immersed in a ritual bath in order to regain its state of purity. This is the meaning of the additional words וכבס שני וטהר, “it must be washed a second time to become purified.” This “second” washing refers to immersion in a ritual bath.
    
    Everything connected with the legislation of afflictions to garments or skin (or houses) is of a miraculous nature (Tanchuma Metzora 4). Let us illustrate the subject by means of a parable. An unsatisfactory slave had been sold by his master. When the new master buys him he is perfectly aware that the previous master had been dissatisfied with that slave and that this is why he wanted to divest himself of him. Seeing that this is so, the new master equipped himself with handcuffs in order to restrain the slave in case of need. Similarly, G’d. When G’d created man He was perfectly aware that man (the servant) would in due course commit sins, etc. G’d therefore arranged for means of afflictions to serve to straighten out man’s behaviour pattern. When G’d felt He needed to employ means of restraining man, He would first afflict man’s house. This is the meaning of Leviticus 14,34: “I shall afflict a house in the land of your inheritance with an affliction of tzoraat.” If, as a result of seeing the stones of his house afflicted, the person concerned becomes a penitent, all well and good; if not, G’d will smite his clothing as a second warning. This is the meaning of the words והבגד אשר יהיה בו נגע צרעת, “and the garment which will be afflicted with a nega tzoraat” (13,47). If the afflicted person now does teshuvah, all well and good; only if both of these warnings were ignored will G’d actually afflict the skin of the sinner. Even then He will only afflict a small area of skin initially. If after being quarantined and ostracised temporarily, such a person still does not learn his lesson then the affliction is allowed to spread, eventually resulting in his becoming for all intents and purposes an outcast. Apparently, the initial stages of personal afflictions are the loss of hair on a man’s head (13,40). This is still not a conclusive symptom and his isolation is only of a provisional nature. If that person persists in his asocial conduct, etc., he will be smitten with a skin affliction such as שאת או ספחת as mentioned in 13,2.
    In their commentary on Ruth in Ruth Rabbah 2,10 the sages stated that the merciful Lord does not punish the sinner on his body in the first instance but first exacts retribution from his possessions. Only when such “hints” fail to have a sobering effect on the people concerned does He proceed to inflict harm on the body of the person. We observe such a phenomenon in the case of Job. G’d had told Satan initially to test Job’s piety only by depriving him of his material goods (Job 1,12). Subsequently, after he had stood that test saying: “the Lord gave the Lord took may the name of the Lord be praised,” did He give permission for Job to experience the loss of his children and, eventually, he was subjected to personal suffering on his body.
    The same happened when G’d struck the Egyptians with the 10 plagues. In the first instance, when the river turned into blood, this was merely a financial blow to the people as they had to buy water from the Israelites or had to dig for it (Exodus 7,21-25). G’d afflicted their livestock next, and eventually He killed their firstborn.
    The afflictions mentioned both in this portion and in the next follow a similar pattern although they are not recorded in the order in which they occur. First G’d afflicts a man’s house. If he becomes a penitent, taking the hint, the afflicted stones on his house have to be removed and replaced (14,40). If he fails to respond to the implied warning to become a penitent, the entire house will have to be razed to the ground (14,45). If this also fails to produce the desired result, G’d will afflict that sinner’s clothing  (13,56). If this does not produce the desired result G’d will afflict the person of the sinner. Thus far the Midrash.
    We see from the example of the nega-im that G’d’s supervision of man’s fate (Israel’s) is comprehensive. No aspect of these phenomena is due to natural causes. Every phenomenon as well as its sequence is supernatural. Moreover, no such phenomena ever occurred outside the boundaries of the Holy Land.- According to Nachmanides we must not misunderstand this to mean that it was the nature of the soil in the Holy Land to respond in such a fashion to non-observance of certain laws of the Torah. The phenomena merely reflect that the Lord watches with special intensity everything which goes on amongst the Jewish people while they live in Eretz Yisrael. These phenomena testify to the presence of guilt amongst the Israelites. (compare Psalms 89,33) “I will punish their iniquity with plagues.” All of this in order to encourage the guilty to leave that path and to return to G’d faithfully so as to rid themselves of their guilt. We find an allusion to all this even in the words of our portion (13,13) כלו הפך לבן טהור הוא, “if all of him has turned white he will be ritually clean.” The line has a double meaning, i.e. that not only has the entire skin of the afflicted person turned white, but it is considered a symptom that he has become free from sin.
    In order to understand G’d’s loving approach even to the ones who sinned against him, the legislation about houses displaying these kinds of stains is introduced (14,34) with the words “I will give a plague of tzoraat on your house.” Is this then “a gift” that G’d describes it as such? Indeed it is, as instead of punishing the sinner on his body G’d gives him this kind of a warning. The wording “I will give” is applied simultaneously to the giving of the land as possession to the Jewish people and as the experience of such plagues. This teaches that the whole legislation applies only in Eretz Yisrael, not even in Jerusalem as that city has not been allocated as part of any tribe’s ancestral territory but belongs to the entire nation (Yuma 12). Only the parts of the land known as ארץ אחוזה, “inalienable inherited property,” are subject to the נגעים legislation. May we all live to see that land rebuilt in the near future!
   תורת המצורע



   מפרי פי איש תשבע בטנו תבואת שפתיו ישבע, “A man’s belly is filled with the fruit of his mouth he will be filled by the produce of his lips.” (Proverbs 18,20) In this verse Solomon told us something about the power of the tongue (speech), be it for good or for evil. If man employs the power of speech to speak words of Torah, to admonish people to live according to Torah and to thereby help Jewish society to acquire spiritual merits for themselves, then his reward is with him, and his works are a beacon shining before him.” [he will be recognised for his true worth. Ed.] (Isaiah 40,10). On the other hand, if he uses the power of speech to engage in slander, character assassination, and the like, his punishment will be served up to him and he will have to consume it to his being more than sated with it. We must therefore understand the beginning of this verse as applying to the dissemination of evil gossip and the like; and the end, i.e. the words “his mouth will be filled by the produce of his lips,” as referring to the reward in store for those who use their power of speech judiciously, providing spiritual merits for the society in which they live. This is also the meaning of another saying of Solomon in Proverbs 18,21 “Death and life are in the power of the tongue; those who love it will eat its fruit.” What the author is saying is that seeing the tongue controls death and life, if someone loves the tongue, i.e. is anxious to keep talking at all times, he should endeavour to choose subjects which are liable to enhance his life, i.e. speak words of wisdom, moral and ethical exhortation, etc. If he does so he will get to eat (as a reward) the fruit of the power of speech. Only in that case will people who are fond of talking increase their own merit in proportion to their frequent use of the tongue.
    In the reverse case, i.e. someone who loves to talk but uses his tongue indiscriminately, so that he engages in gossiping and worse, as his punishment he will eat “the fruit of that punishment.” Considering all this it is important to be most circumspect in the use of one’s tongue. The Torah has shown us on several occasions that if someone abuses his power of speech and uses it negatively he will be afflicted with the disease of tzoraat. Our sages in Vayikra Rabbah 16,2 have found that the very words introducing the subject of the מצורע could be paraphrased as זאת תורת המוציא שם רע, “this is the law about people who indulge in character assassination.”
    14,2. זאת תהיה תורת המצורע ביום טהרתו והובא אל הכהן, “this shall be the law of the person afflicted with tzoraat; on the day he regains purity he is to be brought to the priest.” The sages in Tanchuma Metzora 1 have explained that this affliction is a retribution for the evil tongue as we know from Kohelet 5,5: “let not your mouth bring guilt on your flesh.” Solomon means to not give permission to your mouth to express words which will harm the rest of your body. Do not subsequently say to the angel who is in charge of you (remainder of the verse in Kohelet) that it was an unintentional aberration. Every word a person utters is recorded in a book, be it something appropriate or inappropriate, be it intentional or unintentional. “Why should G’d have reason to be angry at what you have said? Why should He have to thwart the work of your hands?” The “work of your hands” which Solomon refers to in that verse are the hand and feet of your body which will become afflicted with skin disorders.
    Another explanation pertaining to the above verse in Kohelet: the words אל תתן את פיך, “do not let your mouth, etc.;” these words are an example of the Torah using inoffensive language for a serious admonition. In this instance it means “do not allow your mouth to become guilty, etc.;” if your wife told you that she started to menstruate do not bring sin upon her body by ignoring her state of impurity and cohabiting with her. The words following, i.e. ואל תאמר לפני המלאך  “and do not say to the angel” (who is in charge of determining the appearance and physical health of the unborn fetus) that you committed that sin inadvertently, that you were unaware of your wife’s ritual impurity at the time she conceived the fetus; the words למה יקצוף אלו-הים וחבל מעשיך, “why should G’d become angry and frustrate your actions” (the semen which was meant to produce a health child?) mean that Solomon attributes physical blemishes in children as caused by the sins committed by the parent (or parents) when having marital relations.
    Yet another approach to the verse in Kohelet: Solomon means “why should you incriminate yourself and your flesh by ignoring the laws of G’d so that you will need an angel (priests are referred to as angels of the Lord by the prophet Maleachi 2,7)  who would have to preside over your becoming healed ultimately?” You would only be deceiving yourself, why make G’d angry? The words מעשה ידיך, “the work of your hands,” refer to the fetus which you helped to produce and who will be struck with the tzoraat disease as a result of your sin.
    When the Torah in our verse continues with the words “on the day he wants to become purified,” this means that on that day he must be brought to the priest. This teaches that it is impossible for the purification to become halachically effective without the priest declaring the subject to have become ritually pure. Although the word והובא, “he is brought to the priest,” sounds as if the afflicted person has to come to the priest, this is not so. The priest goes to see the afflicted person outside the camp. This is clear from the words “the priest will go outside the camp and inspect the affliction” (verse 3).
    Tanchuma Metzora 2, quoting Proverbs 18,21 that “life and death are within the power of the tongue,” says that everything depends on the tongue. If it is used properly it confers life, if it is abused it results in death for its owner. The word חיים, “life" in that context refers to Torah which has been described as עץ חיים היא למחזיקים בה, “it is a tree of life for the ones who hold on to it.” In fact, Torah is an effective medication against the damage one has inflicted upon oneself through indulging in evil gossip. The Midrash bases this on Proverbs 15,4: “a tree of life is a healing tongue.” If the person had been engaged in disseminating evil gossip he had thereby forfeited his life; the sin of spreading evil gossip is considered morally as worse than killing. The reason is that when one kills one only kills a single life, whereas when one spreads evil gossip about someone one causes death to at least three people, i.e. the one who tells it, the one who listens to it (approvingly), and the one concerning whom the gossip is related.
    Let us take an historical example from Samuel I 22,16: Doeg the Edomite who spread gossip about Achimelech son of Achitov was killed. Achimelech was killed by Saul who had accepted the slander without investigating it. King Saul was also killed as we know from Chronicles I 10,13: “Saul died on account of the trespass he committed against the Lord.” Saul himself is quoted as telling the Amalekite youth to give him the last stab as he was already in the throes of a death struggle” (Samuel II 1,9). He had become guilty for destroying Nov the city of priests  based on evil gossip which he had not checked out. The word שבץ used by Saul and which we translated as “death throes,” are understood by the sages as a reference to the priestly garments as we know from Exodus 28,13 ועשית משבצות זהב, “make them  golden settings.”  
    Doeg the Edomite was uprooted not only from life on earth but also from the hereafter as we know from Psalms 52,7: a hymn composed on that occasion, “G’d will tear you down for good, will break you and pluck you from your tent, and root you out of the land of the living, Selah.” [for a brilliant analysis of this psalm read the Alschech’s commentary. Ed.]
    What is a greater sin? He who kills with the sword or he who kills by shooting an arrow? We would assume that killing by an arrow is the greater sin as the archer does not have to risk his own life in personal combat in order to achieve his goal. If this is true, it is clear that he who engages in evil gossip is guilty of the worst kind of assassination as he keeps out of danger himself. This is why character-assassination is compared to shooting arrows at the victim such as in Jeremiah 9,7: “their tongue is sharpened like an arrow, they use their mouths to deceive; one speaks to his fellow in friendship, but lays an ambush for him in his heart.” Another verse describing something similar is found in Psalms 57,5: “people whose teeth are spears and arrows, whose tongue is a sharp sword.”
    Evil gossip is a greater sin than “mere” murder, idolatry or indulging one’s carnal instincts indiscriminately. Proof that it is worse than murder is deduced from Genesis 4,13 where Kayin describes his sin as too severe to endure its burden. It is more serious than indulging one’s carnal instincts with partners forbidden to one as we know from Joseph (Genesis 39,9) who explained the severity of that sin to the wife of Potiphar. It is more serious than idolatry seeing that when Moses described this sin committed by the Jewish people to G’d when they worshipped the golden calf  he said: “indeed the people committed a very great sin.” When describing the sin of לשון הרע on the other hand, (Psalms 12,4) David invokes G’d pleading: “may the Lord cut off all flattering lips, every tongue that speaks גדולות, “arrogance.”  The commentators understand the plural of the word גדולות in that psalm as describing the sin of abusing the power of the tongue as a “double” sin, i.e. more severe than a single sin such as worshipping idols, for instance. This is why Solomon said that life and death are at the disposal of one’s tongue.
    Look at what happened to Miriam who was struck with the disease of tzoraat (Numbers 12,1) because she spoke against Moses. What did she do that was so terrible? She spoke to her own brother (Aaron) privately, not within the hearing of Moses nor of anyone else. She was well-intentioned meaning to re-unite Moses with his wife whom he had divorced. The Torah describes G’d’s reaction as fierce, and had Moses not interceded on her behalf she would not have been cured. To this day we recite the lines of Deut. 24,9 in which the Torah demands that we remember what Miriam was guilty of and how G’d punished her. You may apply a little logic to see how serious is the ordinary sin of spreading evil gossip when you reflect on what happened to well-intentioned Miriam who had spoken privately to her brother. How will G’d react to people who deliberately besmirch someone’s reputation by the tales they spread about him? Consider what the Torah wrote immediately prior to the reminder to remember what G’d did to Miriam (Deut. 24,8) The Torah writes: “beware of the tzoraat affliction, be very careful and act according to everything the priests and Levites teach you.” Even Aaron, who was the High Priest, (and had not said a word) was struck with that affliction seeing that the Torah said that G’d was angry “at them,”‘ i.e. not merely at Miriam. Aaron was healed immediately, seeing his was the lesser sin as he had not said anything, had only listened without admonishing Miriam. We know that Aaron must have been cured immediately as the Torah only writes of Miriam having been quarantined outside the camp for seven days delaying the Israelites’ journey during that period (Numbers 12,15).
    You will also find that the original serpent, the first creature ever to engage in slander against its Creator, was struck with tzoraat as the Torah reports G’d saying to the serpent “because you have done this, etc., you are cursed” (Genesis 3,14). The curse consisted of the serpent being afflicted with tzoraat. Our sages derive this from the expression צרעת ממארת היא in Leviticus 13,52. On these words Rav Hunna quoted a comment by Rabbi Joshua ben Levi who said that the scales on the skin of the snake are a form the tzoraat took when it afflicted the serpent (compare Bereshit Rabbah 20,4). This was not the full extent of the serpent’s punishment. We have a tradition that in the world to come (after the resurrection), people who suffered from diverse deformities while on earth the previous time will be resurrected as completely healthy and with unblemished bodies. The snake will be the only exception to this rule. Seeing that Isaiah wrote (Isaiah 35,6): ”then the lame shall leap like a deer, and the tongue of the dumb shall shout aloud,” the prophet prophesies resurrection of the beasts mentioning that domesticated beasts and lions will graze together; however the snake will still have to eat dust  as it will never be cured from its affliction (compare Isaiah 11,6). The reason is that the serpent through its use of the tongue dragged man into the dust, (caused his mortality, Tanchuma Metzora 2).
    
    14,4. שתי צפרים חיות טהורות, “two live birds, of the pure species.” All “pure” birds are known as צפור. We know this from Deut. 14,11: כל צפור טהורה תאכלו, “you may eat all the birds belonging to the species known as צפור טהורה.” This excludes birds known as עופות טמאות. This means that although the bird itself has all the symptoms of purity, the fact that it has been associated with forbidden practices such as birds belonging to people of an עיר הנדחת, “a city condemned to destruction because the majority of its inhabitants worshipped idols,” makes such a bird “unclean.” Or, for instance, if such a bird of the “pure species” killed a human being, it also forfeits its status of being a צפור טהורה, and may not be eaten or used as an offering.
    A Midrashic approach (compare Tanchuma Metzora 3)  to the wording in our verse: G’d said that the sacrifice to be brought by people who have overcome their affliction should consist of birds which twitter a lot so as to remind the person offering this sacrifice that the indiscriminate use of their tongue had been the cause of their suffering the affliction in the first place. In other words: “let the sound of the bird atone for the sound made by its owner.”
   ועץ ארז ושני תולעת ואזוב, “and cedarwood, crimson thread and hyssop.” The verse mentioned both the most precious and the lowliest of plants. Solomon did the same thing in Kings I, 5,13 when he was described as lecturing about the cedars of the Lebanon and the hyssop. Our sages comment that the inclusion of both types of plants in the same breath teach that if one had arrogated to oneself the mien of something superior to oneself, i.e. given oneself a title that one had not earned, the only way to atone for this and to regain one’s true station in life is to demean oneself to the level of the lowest in the social order, the hyssop (compare Rashi).
    
    14,7. על פני השדה, “in the open country.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason that the live bird is released into open country is connected to the fact that the disease it atones for, i.e. carries away with it in a symbolic fashion, was one that was infectious. It is appropriate therefore to release the bird to where it is unlikely to infect anyone (compare Ibn Ezra). This would also explain the spirit of impurity which had settled on the afflicted person as a result of his having submitted to these negative emanations originating with the original serpent. This is all due to his behaviour which paralleled that of that serpent when it engaged in slander. This is also why throughout the Talmud and even in the Torah, (compare Aaron’s plea on behalf of Miriam  in Numbers 12,12) a  person afflicted with this dread disease is compared to a dead person, i.e. the root cause of all defilement and ritual impurity.
    Another allusion contained in the words על פני השדה  may be to the פורחות השדה, “tramp-like demons,” which infest those areas much as Satan is at home in the desert. Remember that the bird being released here had first been dipped in the blood of its mate which had been slaughtered. The whole procedure of what is happening to the two birds and their atoning for the sin of an individual is reminiscent of the two male goats on Yom Kippur which atone for the collective sins of the people, the live scape-goat being consigned to virgin territory as a “gift, or bribe to Satan.” In this instance the live bird “carried” with it the sins of the person on whose behalf it was offered.
    This bird was not allowed to be released either to the desert or the sea as we know from Torat Kohanim Sifra Metzora 2,5 where the examples given are that one must not stand in Jaffa and release the bird in the direction of the sea, nor must one stand in some cultivated area of the country and release the bird into the desert.
    
    14,35. ובא אשר לו הבית, “and the one to whom the house belongs shall come, etc.” Our sages in Yuma 11 read out of these words that the house in question is under the exclusive control of one person who does not wish to lend furniture or utensils or invite guests to his house. If the house was struck with tzoraat this was in response to the tight-fisted nature of its owner. This is what is meant by “the one whose house it is must come to the priest and tell him that an affliction similar to tzoraat has infested the stones of his house.”
    A Midrashic approach based on Vayikra Rabbah 17,7: The owner of the house described here is G’d; the words “he shall tell the priest” refer to the prophet Jeremiah; the words “something like the symptoms of a plague has inflicted my house,” refer to the idol placed in the Holy Temple by King Menashe of Yehudah.
    
    14,36. וצוה הכהן ופנו את הבית, “and the priest will issue instructions and they will clear out the house, etc.” The Torah is protective about the Israelites’ possessions, even for such inexpensive vessels as the ones made of earthenware. The vessels mentioned in our verse are such as the Torah speaks about protecting against becoming impure. Vessels of other materials can be purified by means of immersion in a ritual bath, the earhenware vessels cannot. If there is food and drink left over, the person may consume them during the days when he is ritually impure, so that he would not suffer an irreparable loss. It is clear therefore that what the Torah is concerned with here are only earthenware vessels.
    
    14,37. והנה הנגע בקירות הבית, “and here the affliction is on the walls of the house.” Up until this point the Torah had listed 10 different kinds of nega-im, afflictions; six of them occur on the body of a person; they are שאת, ספחת, בהרת, שחין, נתק, מריטת הראש. Four additional afflictions infect things other than his body such as woolen garments, linen garments, leather garments or utensils, and the walls of a house. You will find that the ten are arranged in the order in which we just mentioned them. There is a correlation here to the Ten Commandments. The message is that as long as the Israelites observe the Ten Commandments, i.e. the Torah which the Ten Commandments represent, they will not experience any of these ten afflictions. If they fail to honour the Torah and its precepts they will become victims of what the Torah has listed in the way of nega-im.
   שקערורות, “depressed;” our sages in Sifra Metzora 6,5 claim that the appearance of these afflictions in the walls was as if that area was depressed, recessed. The reason that the Torah in this paragraph switches to the plural although the word נגע is in the singular, is that the owner of the house as well as his neighbour must share in the cost of removing the infected stones. This is what the Sifra Metzora 4,2 had in mind  when they said אוי לרשע ואוי לשכנו, “woe to the wicked and his neighbour.” As soon as talk of the demolition has been concluded, the Torah reverts to the singular such as with the words קציע, וטח, etc. This is meant to tell us that only the person whose house had displayed definitive symptoms of the nega has to bear the cost of the restoration. In other words, the labour has to be shared but the cost has to be borne by the owner of the house alone.
    
    14,46. והבא אל הבית, “anyone who comes to the house, etc.,” a house which has been sealed provisionally does not confer impurity on everyone who enters it. This is why the Torah uses the expression  הבא אליו“who enters,” i.e. if the person enters through the regular doorway. If such a person remains inside long enough to eat half a loaf of bread he and his clothing and any other items he carries or wears are defiled through his stay. If his stay is of shorter duration only his person becomes impure as a result of his entering. 
    
    14,53. וכפר על הבית וטהר, “he shall provide atonement for the house and it will become purified.” Nachmanides writes that seeing the affliction on a person’s house is not viewed as seriously as an affliction on his garments or his body, the Torah did not demand that the purification rites include bringing also a guilt-offering and a sin-offering. All such a person has to do is bring the bird-offerings presented by a poor person who was afflicted with tzoraat on his skin, plus the cedarwood and the hyssop.
    
    14,54-56. זאת התורה לכל נגע הצרעת ולנתק. ולצרעת הבגד ולבית. ולשאת ולספחת ולבהרת. “This is the legislation for every tzoraat affliction and the netek; and afflictions on the garments and the house; and of the se-eth, the sapachat, and the baheret.” Even though the tradition handed down to us concerning all these laws is the reliable one, i.e. that the sequence in which G’d afflicts potential victims is that first He afflicts their houses to give them a chance to repent, followed by afflictions on the garments hoping that the sinners will mend their ways, and that only as a last resort does G’d afflict the bodies of the sinners concerned, the fact remains that in the written Torah the order is reversed, the Torah commencing the legislation with  skin disorders, followed by similar disorders on the garments followed by the houses which display signs that the walls are afflicted.
    The reason the Torah chose to write the sequence which we find before us rather than the sequence our sages have told us, is  that the Torah’s ways are ways of pleasantness (Proverbs 3,17). Had the Torah followed the reverse pattern of reporting these kinds of afflictions we would have read of matters going from bad to worse; this would not have made for edifying reading. As it is, the Torah first lists the most severe afflictions, proceeding to describe afflictions which are progressively easier on the victim, i.e. that only his garments or the walls of his house undergoes an affliction.
    
    15,2. איש איש כי יהיה זב מבשרו זובו טמא הוא, “any man who will have a discharge from his flesh, his discharge is contaminated.” Rashi comments that the last two words, זובו טמא, refer to the drop of the discharge which confers impurity on the person whom it touches. The appearance of the discharge described here is similar to the colour of water from a dough made from barley flour; it is also similar in appearance to the white of an egg turned bad, i.e. mixed with the yolk. This is different from sperm which looks like the white of an egg which retained its consistency.
    The Torah adds the words (verse 3) רר בשרו את זובו, “running with the discharge from his flesh;” to tell us that the discharge resembles the saliva which comes out of the mouth as a clear fluid. When the verse continues with או החתים בשרו מזובו, this describes a thicker opaque fluid which has a tendency to block the exit from the urinal canal.
    The reason  that the man afflicted with this disease has to bring only two birds as an offering after he has completed the purification rites is that seeing he had been smitten with a severe and infectious disease from which he has been healed by the grace of G’d, he has to offer the thanksgiving offerings anyone who has recovered from a serious disease is commanded to offer. The Torah does not belabour that point at this stage. The sin-offering legislated here is so that G’d will grant atonement for any sin which had caused the disease in the first place. The burnt-offering is an expression of gratitude for having been healed from the discharge.
    
    15,11. וידיו לא שטף במים, “before he rinsed his hands in water.” The Torah does not mean this literally but means an immersion of the whole body in a ritual bath (compare Maimonides Mikvaot 1,2). The reason the Torah used the expression שטף is because the Torah wanted to indicate that nothing must prevent the water from touching the entire surface of the body. In other words, the water must be applied to the whole body just as when you wash your hands the entire hand is touched by the water. The word occurs in 6,21 ומורק ושוטף במים, “purged and rinsed in water,” where it clearly means that the copper vessel of which the Torah speaks must be completely covered by water. We find the word also in Jeremiah 47,2, לנחל שוטף, “the waters shall become a raging torrent.” According to Rashi, the use of the word for “rinsing” mentioned here means that if the water in the ritual bath did not enter hidden crevices of the body but came into contact only with surfaces of the body this would suffice. Just as the hand has no hidden crevice, so only the parts of the body which can easily be accessed by the water are meant.
    
    15,16. ורחץ במים את כל בשרו, “he must wash his entire body with water.” This is the only time in connection with the legislation of ritual impurity that the Torah speaks of washing “the entire body.” Even when purification from more severe levels of ritual impurity is discussed, such as the person suffering a discharge, the Torah did not demand that “the whole body” be washed. The reason for all this may have to do with the four basic raw materials man is made of, i.e. fire, spirit (wind), water and dust. This was not the order in which these elements appear in the report of the creation in Genesis where the first element mentioned is the spirit (רוח) in Genesis 1,1, followed by water and  fire and dust (earth). In the Sefer Yetzira, (oldest kabbalistic text)  air-(רוח)- fire-water are listed as the three “mothers,” so-called because they are like mothers to all that is found in the universe. These three elements are perceived as “descended” from the other, i.e. air begets water and water begets fire. This view is supported by verses from the Scriptures, of course. When the Torah writes in Genesis 1,2: בהו, וחושך; this means that fire is descended from water. The words ורוח אלו-הים מרחפת על פני המים mean that the water is “descended” from the element  רוח, “air or spirit.” This is the reason why in our daily prayers we refer to the sequence משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם, “who makes the air blow and makes the rain descend.” Support for the statement that fire is “descended” from water comes from the scientific fact that fire is [or at least may be Ed.] extracted from water. (compare Talmud Beytzah Mishnah folio 33 that “on the festival it is forbidden to extract fire from the water.”) [apparently experiments were conducted with glass bottles filled with water being exposed to intense sunlight. After a while, due to the water having become overheated, the glass burst into flames. quoted by Rashi. Ed.] Dust, i.e. earth is “descended” from fire. The reference is to the fertiliser left behind after something has been burned up. [Dust or earth in this instance refers to the earth and its ability to produce crops, etc. Perhaps the earth thrown up as volcanic ash is the best example of fire “producing” fertile earth. Ed.]
    When these three elements surface as part of a human being they have been metamorphosed, the white part of man corresponds to the element water; the red part of man corresponds to the element fire; the black part of man corresponds to the element dust=earth. The element רוח, “spirit,” which is a fundamental part of man is the basic element and dominates all the other elements of which he is composed.
    It is common knowledge that every such element contains within it particles of each of the four elements; seeing that this is so whenever one of these elements displays signs of becoming dominant, the other parts of the same element which up to that time were dormant within their respective “master” element, now awaken. Let us say that the רוח המתאוה, “the element called the spirit of desire“ awakens in a person, the parallel minor particles of that element which had been lying dormant within the other three elements now “awaken” even while the other three elements and their respective minor particles within them remain “asleep, dormant.” Seeing that the element רוח was the basic element which aroused these “dormant” particles of it within the other elements, it may be considered as “eternally awake, never dormant.” Seeing that this is so our verse demands that the person who has had an emission of sperm wash his entire body as due to the desire awakened in all parts of the body as a result of that emission, or “wakeful state of the spirit of desire,” the secondary particles of that spirit throughout the other parts of the body have been awakened, have been activated. Seeing they were all participants, they all have to be immersed in water for the entire body to become purified. The element called “spirit of desire” is different from the other three elements making up the body, as the other three are “dead” when the body is asleep. This fourth element, the רוח המתאוה, “the spirit of desire,” is not “dead” even while the body is asleep. 
    The reason that there is a need for purification of the entire body in water is that the drop of sperm in question was not even potentially able to fertilise a woman’s ovum seeing that its “partners” in the body of the person emitting it had been asleep, i.e. “dead” when this emission occurred. They had not agreed to it, so to speak. Seeing that as a result of these considerations the sperm was defective, useless, it produced a greater degree of impurity than normal cohabitation between man and woman. [I must say that I do not follow this at all, seeing that Lot was able to fertilise each of his daughters with his sperm although it was emitted while he was asleep (Genesis 19,31-37)! Ed.]
    When you look at verse 18 in our verse describing cohabitation between a man and a woman (while both are awake I presume), the Torah, while requiring that they both “wash in water,” does not require that they bathe their entire body in water as it did here concerning a nocturnal emission. The reason is that all parts of the “elements” were “awake” in both parties to this sexual union, i.e. gave their consent, thus enabling the sperm to potentially fertilise an ovum.
    A further consideration explaining the difference in the degree of purification required between people who cohabit and someone who experiences a nocturnal involuntary emission of semen, is that an intentional emission of semen prepares the semen to be imbued with the power to become alive, as it represents the natural urges of the body emitting it, its true purpose. Although the Torah does decree impurity for a person indulging in such a normal, in fact mandatory activity if he wants to fulfill the commandment of being fruitful, most people are not dominated by such lofty considerations at the time they indulge their libido. [I have paraphrased this somewhat. Ed.] However, when semen is emitted nocturnally, the very material may be considered as at least ”semi-dead” seeing that the spirit of the person is asleep, he is not in the least motivated by the intention of fulfilling a positive commandment.
     You may wish to compare our verse with Deut. 23,11-12: “If there be amongst you a man who will not be clean because of a nocturnal emission of semen, he shall go outside the camp; he shall not enter the midst of the camp; when it will be toward evening he shall wash (immerse) himself in water, ירחץ במים, and when the sun sets he may enter the midst of the camp.” In that instance the Torah does not mention the words כל בשרו, “all of his flesh,” as it did in our verse. The meaning of the words ירחץ בשרו therefore is the same as in other similar verses, i.e. את כל בשרו, “all of his flesh.”
    
    15,19. ואשה כי תהיה זבה, דם יהיה זובה בבשרה, “when a woman has a discharge,-the discharge from her flesh being blood;” the reason the Torah adds the words דם יהיה זובה is to contrast it with the discharge of a man who emits a whitish fluid. 
   שבעת ימים תהיה בנדתה, “she will remain in her state of separation for seven days;” even if she saw only a single discharge she must still remain in her state of impurity for seven days. This entire paragraph discusses the normal menstruation of a woman experiencing her monthly cycle. The verses are rather inconclusive when read at first glance. We do not find any mention of the woman in question requiring immersion in a ritual bath; the only thing we are told is that if someone touches the bed she has lain on while she is in the state of impurity described, such a person is contaminated by her ritual impurity. The Torah does say (verse 21) that this second person will have to immerse himself in a ritual bath in order to become ritually pure again.
    We find a responsum quoted by Tossaphot Yuma 78 that Rabbi Yehuda gaon was told in answer to his enquiry that the requirement of a menstruous woman to immerse herself in a ritual bath at the conclusion of the seven days (minimum) is a Biblical requirement derived by simple logic (קל וחומר). “If someone merely touching her bed requires immersion in a ritual bath in order to regain his ritual purity, she, who is the source of that impurity, most certainly does not require any less.”
    The Talmud Shabbat 64 understands the words “she shall remain seven days in her state of separation” to mean  that this is the minimum length of time before she is allowed to immerse herself in a ritual bath. This is in contrast to her companion who has touched her bed who may immerse himself immediately and be ritually clean after sunset on that day. The Torah makes her regaining her ritual purity subject to two conditions, a) the number of days after she started menstruating, b) that she immerses herself in a ritual bath. Some of the authorities such as Maimonides Issurey Bi-ah 4,3 derived the law from the words ורחצו במים, “they are to immerse themselves in water” (Verse 18).
 They consider that verse as the בנין אב, precedent, for all similar situations when people who have incurred ritual impurity have to immerse themselves in a ritual bath in order to regain their status of being ritually pure.
    Our sages (Ketuvot 61) have said further that a woman who is ritually unclean due to her menstruation may perform all the normal tasks she ordinarily performs for her husband, the exception being that she must not pour wine or water into his cup, put linen on his bed, or wash his hands or feet. Seeing that she is so used to pour drinks into his cup, as long as there is a reminder on the table to remind him not to touch her due to her state of impurity she may even fill his cup. One such “reminder” would be that she performs this task with her alternate hand, i.e. if she is right-handed, with her left hand. She is not to pour directly into his cup even with the left hand but to put the jug on the table after having filled it with her left hand. Abbaye used to put the cup of wine of her husband on top of the wine-casket at such times, whereas his colleague Rava’s wife put it at the side of his pillow. Changing the linen of the husband’s bed is only prohibited in the husband’s presence; when he is not present the wife may perform this chore. Washing her husband’s hands and feet is prohibited not only with hot water but even with cold water. If the wife contravened this rule and in the process touched her husband’s body this is considered equivalent to קירוב בשר, and even touching her husband only with her small finger is prohibited. She is not even allowed to pour the water on her husband without actually coming into contact with him. Such an act would result in too close an association between their minds.
    A person must endeavour to keep a certain distance from his wife during the days that she is נדה, menstrually impure. Our sages in Shabbat 13 base this on  Leviticus 18,6 לא תקרבון לגלות ערותן, “you must not approach to uncover nakedness.” The word תקרבון, implies not to come even near the person with whom sexual contact is forbidden. Seeing that within woman is the organ which enables the formation of human beings one must always conduct oneself with her in a state of purity in order for the baby to be conceived in a state of purity and for it to be able to receive its soul in a state of purity. It is common knowledge that the various character traits of a personality are strongly influenced by the condition of mother and father at the time of the baby’s conception (compare Nachmanides Iggeret Hakodesh chapter 5).
    Our sages in Keritut 2 have stated that if someone has sexual relations with a woman who is in a state of menstruation he becomes guilty of the penalty of karet, (premature death, or death without children). It is even forbidden to share the same bed with his wife if both husband and wife are fully clothed (Shabbat 13). This is based on Leviticus 18,19 לא תקרב לגלות ערותה, “do not approach (a woman in that state) to uncover her nakedness.” G’d has warned the Israelites not to conduct their sex lives in a manner similar to that of the Gentiles.
    If you will take a good look at this paragraph you will find that the Torah did not obligate the menstruous woman to offer a sacrifice at the termination of her period whereas the woman experiencing a discharge (of a similar nature, emanating from the same orifice in her body) has to bring an offering at the end of her purification period. The reason for this difference is that the monthly menstruation cycle is considered a “natural disease,” something that she does not get cured from during all her child-bearing years. This is why the Torah prescribed a fixed number of days which have to elapse before this “natural disease” is presumed to have disappeared.
    The discharge called זיבה is not of the same category; this is why when the Torah describes the phenomenon it emphasises that it occurs during the days of the month when menstruation cannot be expected (verse 25). Alternatively, this discharge may occur many days after she had finished her monthly cycle. This discharge is an abnormality just as the discharge of semen-like fluid in the male is an abnormality. In both instances the cure has to be followed by a sacrificial offering. It is worth noting that we are not familiar with the disease called נדה, menstrual discharge, amongst any other female species. It is something exclusive to the human species and due to the sin committed by the first woman when she ate from the tree of knowledge. According to Sotah 12 it was the result of a decree recorded at that time that not only she but all women after her would experience discomfort, pain, etc., in anything connected with conception, pregnancy, birthing, etc., (compare Genesis 3,16). Seeing that the beasts have no intelligence and their entire lives are not based on considerations involving reward and punishment, there is no reason to afflict the female of their species with such a natural disease.
    One may speculate that due to the spirit of impurity which has become an integral part of woman ever since that experience with the serpent, woman is able to display drops of blood on a mirror or glass surface after she has looked at it with intensity during the beginning of her state of menstruation (compare what we wrote on Leviticus 12,2 at the end.)
    You should also know that although the state of being נדה is a “natural disease,” it is something beneficial for the fetus that will develop after she has been cured and has resumed marital relations with her husband, as during the period of her menstruation her body discharged extraneous, potentially harmful materials from her body. When a new fetus is conceived its conception occurs under biologically optimal conditions. The woman’s “blood” which is her contribution is in a medically purified state at that time. In that condition the fetus is able to receive Divine input, i.e. intelligence. [The author perceives of intelligence as an “angel,” intermediary between man and his G’d, according to Ibn Ezra’s introduction on Genesis. Ed.] Elimination of menstrual blood from a woman’s body is comparable to the removal of rust from iron. Only after this rust has been removed can the iron absorb the rays of sunlight in its full effectiveness. These considerations explain why the phenomenon of menstru-ation is found in human females but not in female animals. An allusion to this basic difference between man and beast is that baby animals derive their mother’s milk from a part of the body adjoining the sex of the animal, whereas human babies suckle on the mother’s breast which is far closer to the head, the seat of man’s intelligence. Each species derives its nutrients from areas adjacent to those representing its primary function.
    
    15,25. ימים רבים, “many days.” Our sages (Sifra Zavim section 5, items  8-9, define the word רבים here as “three.” They reason as follows: had the Torah spoken only of ימים, “days,” I would have assumed that what is meant is two days. Why would I have concluded that the word ימים refers to only two and not many? Rabbi Akiva said that whenever a word lends itself to two possible interpretations, one involving more than the other, I choose the minimum meaning compatible with that word; in this instance the minimum of ימים is “two.”
    Rabbi Nechemyah said: Does then the text of the Torah mean to confuse us? Surely it is meant to enlighten us! If you were to say that the word ימים without the addition רבים could have meant either ten, a hundred, or two hundred, etc., the choices would be unlimited and confusing. Therefore by understanding the word ימים as meaning the minimum, i.e. “two,” the Torah opened the way for us to understand its meaning.
    Rabbi Mona said: the word ימים without further detail means “two.” In the event I would have thought that it means many days this would be superfluous as the Torah already wrote the word רבים, “many.” This indicates that the total number of days the Torah had in mind were relatively few. Seeing that such a minimum of a few days is two, it stands to reason that the word רבים increases this number by a further minimum, i.e. one day more, i.e. a total of three days.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma Metzora 6): Seeing that the woman who is a Niddah has to observe at least seven days in that state how can three days be considered “many,” seeing seven days is much more than three days? Furthermore, we find in Kings I 18,1 that the prophet Jeremiah speaks of: “it was during these many years when G’d spoke to Elijah in the third year saying to him: ‘show yourself to Achav and I will bring on rain.’” The fact is that this did not take place after three years but it was only a single month after the first year full year of the drought had been completed! [the drought began at the beginning of the last month of the year during which Elijah had proclaimed it; it lasted the entire second year, i.e. at the end of the second year no rain had fallen for 13 months. [When G’d told Elijah to reveal himself to Achav, one month had passed of the third year, so that altogether the famine had been in effect for only 14 months. Ed.] Seeing that the period under discussion was one in which hardship and discomfort was experienced, even a relatively short period was described as “many years;” the same is true here. Seeing that the period during which the woman remains relatively isolated and suffers indisposition is an unpleasant period for her, the Torah describes even three days of such a period as ’many days.’”
    
    15,28. ואם טהרה מזובה, “when she becomes purified from her discharge, etc.;” when a woman with such a discharge begins the process of healing and purification she has to count seven days just as has the male who had experienced the discharge from his sexual organ. After the seven days have elapsed she is potentially pure, just as the male is potentially pure after the seven day count. This would have led us to believe that just as the male who had a similar discharge had to immerse himself in מים חיים, water directly from a spring, the woman would have to do the same; seeing that the words “and after that she will be purified” are unnecessary, the sages decided that the woman though not requiring מים חיים, spring water to complete her purification rites, does require immersion in the regular ritual bath
   וספרה לה שבעת ימים, ”she has to count seven days for herself.” She does not have to recite a benediction prior to counting such as is the case when counting the Omer. The reason is that generally speaking, the benediction is recited immediately before the commandment is performed. In this instance, assuming that the woman in question were to see blood during the days she was counting, the days prior to that count would be retroactively annulled; as a result her benediction would amount to uttering the Lord’s name in vain. Due to such a consideration she is not allowed to recite the benediction over her count. The reason why woman has been assigned the command-ment to perform this count and the related procedures is best understood by the words of the Midrash in Bereshit Rabbah 13,17 that woman “spilled the blood of man,” i.e. caused his mortality. In return for this her own blood is to be spilled. This is also why the commandments to set aside challah and to light the Sabbath candles have been assigned to woman to give her an opportunity to rehabilitate the calamity original woman had caused. Adam was considered the challah of mankind, of the universe, as it were. Seeing that through her deed she extinguished the “light” of the universe on the original Sabbath eve, she was given the task to rehabilitate her species through the  lighting of the Sabbath candles every Sabbath eve.
    
    15,31. והזרתם את בני ישראל מטומאתם, “you shall separate the Children of Israel from their ritual impurities.” These additional words are the source for our sages having instructed husbands to separate from their wives when these are about to menstruate (Shevuot 18). As to the length of time a husband has to separate from his wife, Ravina said a 12-hour period. The Talmud Niddah 63 elaborates that if a woman was in the habit of seeing menstrual blood each month at midday, her husband has to stay away from her on that entire day, but he may cohabit with her on the preceding night. If she usually experiences this phenomenon in the second hour after daybreak, she is also still permitted to her husband on the preceding night. If, on the other hand, she usually notices such blood as beginning to flow during the night, even near daybreak, she is out of bounds for intercourse with her husband the entire night before that.  However, she is permitted to her husband during the entire daylight period preceding that night. Even if she normally experiences a blood flow during the second hour of the night, her husband may still disregard her approaching menstruation until sunset  before the night in question. According to theTalmud in Shevuot which we quoted, when a husband disregards these admonitions of the sages, his children (if not of age) even if of the excellence of the sons of Aaron, may be liable to die as a punishment for his lack of restraint. The sages derive all this from the admonition in our verse to separate themselves from contact with their contamination. Immediately after this paragraph the Torah reports (a second time) that the two older sons of Aaron had died. This may be taken as a warning. The sages have actually been warned by our verse to warn the people of the possible consequences of disregard of the instructions in this verse.
    
    15,33. והדוה בנדתה, “concerning a woman experiencing this flow, etc.” The sequence in which the Torah has arranged all the paragraphs describing these sources of impurity originating in our bodies is this: the Torah first listed the male who experiences an involuntary discharge of something similar to seminal fluid (verse 2); next the Torah writes about the result of cohabitation between man and woman (verse 18) resulting in contamination, seeing that also the first example (verse 16) of man having a nocturnal emission had resulted in such contamination. As a result, the Torah here can write: “this is the legislation concerning the male who experiences a discharge” (verse 32). This is followed  by the woman who experiences a vaginal discharge at times other than her menstrual cycle, followed by the woman who experiences her regular menstrual cycle (verse 33). At the very conclusion of our portion the Torah speaks about someone who defies this legislation by cohabiting with a woman while she is contaminated through vaginal discharge of either kind.
    If the Torah had remained true to the sequence followed earlier, the words ולאיש אשר ישכב עם טמאה, “and concerning the man who cohabits with a woman who is in a state of contamination,” should have been written before the words לזכר ולנקבה which would have made a more appropriate ending for this portion.
    I believe the reason that the Torah changed the sequence of the words here was in order to conclude with the words עם טמאה, “with a contaminated woman,” in order to establish the conceptual linkage with the death of the sons of Aaron at the beginning of the next portion. The message is that the Israelites must be warned that unless they observe the laws legislated in our portion including separating themselves from their wives in anticipation of the menstrual cycle setting in, their children would be at risk. Tanchuma Acharey 6 quotes an opinion that the sons of Aaron died as they entered the Sanctuary in a state of ritual impurity not having purified themselves first. If that opinion is correct, the fact that our portion concludes with the words טמאה provides a conceptual link to the recapping of the death of the sons of Aaron in the following verse, the first in Parshat Acharey Mot. [Our author uses this verse to list all the various deficiencies the sons of Aaron have been accused of by the sages of the Midrash. Seeing this has been discussed at length in Leviticus 10,1, I have not repeated this here. Ed.]
     A Midrashic approach to our verse based on Tanchuma Metzora 9: when the Torah writes והדוה בנדתה, this is a reference to the Jewish people whose contamination is comparable to that of a menstruous woman. Such a woman while conferring ritual impurity on others is nonetheless slated to become purified again. Similarly, Israel, though in a state in which it disseminates impurity is liable to become purified again as we know from Ezekiel 36,17 “their way used to be before Me like that of the contaminated state of the menstruous woman.” Significantly, the prophet does not compare the impurity and contamination of the Jewish people as like the impurity and contamination of a dead body which is so severe that a priest may not even enter the house in which a body is lying, but describes it as a far lesser degree of contamination. Had the prophet compared the impurity of the Jewish people to that of a dead body no hope would have been held out for the eventual return of the Shechinah to the people. However, seeing their degree of impurity is compared to that of a נדה, this means that just as a priest may enter the house of such a woman and sit on the porch, so G’d may spread the wings of His Shechinah over the Jewish people even before they have become purified from their state of contamination, i.e. even while they are still in exile among the pagans. We have a specific verse confirming this  in Leviticus 16,16 השוכן אתם בתוך טומאתם, “Who dwells with them amidst their contamination.” In that verse G’d is saying that “you are contaminated only in this world; in the world to come. I will purify you once and for all;” we know this from Ezekiel 36,25: “I will sprinkle upon you pure water and cleanse you from all your contaminations and from all your filth I will purify you.”
    
    
    
   אחרי  מות
    
    
   כי תשב ללחום את מושל בין תבין את אשר לפניך, “When you sit down to dine with a ruler, consider well who is before you.” (Proverbs 23,1). In this verse Solomon warns not to run after princes and after people appointed to the king’s palace in order to curry favour with them, seeing that He, G’d, is the ruler of the universe. Getting too close to the authorities will result in these people suffering damage seeing that rulers on earth are compared to fire, which while beneficial also spreads damage at the same time and consumes all those near it. The benefits derived from fire are that it warms you when you are cold and that it provides light. The damage accruing to those who come too close to it are that they will get burned. Our sages in Avot 1,10 have paraphrased this thought when they said: “hate the holding of high office and do not seek to become intimate with the authorities.”
    The reason that the government is called רשות in the language of our sages is that they have the רשות, “authority,” and the power to do what they want, to open, to close, to save and to destroy. On the same subject our sages in Avot 2,3 also said: “be cautious with the ruling authorities, for they befriend you only for their own interest when it is to their advantage but they do not stand by a man in times of distress.”
    The disadvantages cited as the danger when associating too closely with the authorities are in addition to the built-in problem that being involved with the authorities invariably brings in its wake a loosening of one’s ties to G’d, neglect of Torah study, seeing that time devoted to it will be interpreted as time spent at the expense of one’s duties vis-a-vis the demands of the state. This is what prompted Solomon to say in Proverbs 24,21: “fear the Lord my son and the king, do not associate with those who keep changing.” Solomon advises us to first and foremost cultivate fear of the Lord before worrying about respect for the local king. Under no circumstances should one have one’s priorities mixed up by first cultivating the relationship with one ‘s terrestrial ruler. If one were to do this it is tantamount to desecrating the name of the Lord.
    Concerning this subject we can learn a lesson from the woman in Shunem who was asked by the prophet Elisha if he could do something for her such as interceding on her behalf with the king. Her response was that בתוך עמי אני יושבת, “I live inconspicuously amongst my people;” she meant that she did not want to get involved with the authorities (compare Kings II 4,8). These are the considerations which prompted Solomon to say “when you sit down to dine with the king, consider well who is before you.” Do not be in a hurry to become close to the authorities until you have weighed all the pros and cons. Consider what happened to people who preceded you in such positions. Solomon adds another verse dealing with the subject (Proverbs 29,26). ”Many seek a ruler’s audience, but a man gets justice from the Lord.” What the author meant is that although there are many supplicants wanting favours from a king only a few have their wishes granted so that they are permanent beneficiaries. If you are a discriminating intellect bent on pursuing permanently useful objectives you will refrain from chasing such favours, as the merely physical food served at the king’s table is truly not the sum total of your aspirations in life. Solomon therefore added in Proverbs 23,2: “thrust a knife into your gullet, if you are a man of large appetite.” This is the plain meaning of the above quotation.
    A more rational approach: The author speaks of the Kingdom of Heaven. Solomon warns man not to approach it over and beyond one’s mental capacities. We find other verses in Scripture describing G’d as מושל, ruler, such as Psalms 22,29: כי לה' המלוכה ומושל בגויים, “for kingship is the Lord’s and He rules the nations.” Keeping this thought in mind, Solomon warns you that when you sit down to eat with the ruler you better be clear what nearness to G’d entails, i.e. who qualifies for such an elevated station in life. You must appreciate that the food served at G’d’s table is soul-food, not of the type that is served at the table of a king of flesh and blood. The food you receive there is known as חכמה, the spiritual equivalent to the לחם, “bread,” served here on earth by human kings. The words בין תבין את אשר לפניך mean in essence that you must be sure to comprehend things about the nature of G’d by what is לפניך, “by what is before your eyes,” i.e. by the historical record of G’d’s actions. This is also what David said in Psalms 8,4: “when I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars that You set in place.” The word בין, “between,” suggests that there are two distinct kinds of insights that one must possess in order to properly appreciate the grandeur of G’d and His impact on history as well as on our individual fates. The very concept G’d, Creator, is not a point of departure in one’s thinking but is a conclusion one arrives at after having weighed all the phenomena we are familiar with. This is the meaning of Deut. 4,39: והשבות אל לבביך כי ה' הוא האלו-הים, “and let your heart come to the conclusion that the Lord is your G’d, etc.” When Elijah experienced a personal revelation at Mount Chorev after he had been disillusioned subsequent to what he thought would be G’d’s triumph at Mount Carmel, he had to experience a variety of supernatural phenomena before finally, a most insignificant phenomenon, a whisper, proved to be the real thing, the Presence of G’d (Kings I 19,11-12).
    It is due to such considerations that Solomon hints that several insights have to be gained in order to appreciate certain truths about G’d.
    If one is an intellectually oriented person, Solomon warns that one should not allow one’s intellectual curiosity to cause one to bite off more than one can chew (intellectually speaking); he couches the warning in these words: “thrust a knife in your gullet.” What he means is simple: you would do better to commit suicide than to reach beyond your intellectual capacity in coming close to the Lord. Solomon phrases this more clearly in Kohelet 7,16: “don’t act the wise man to excess or you will be dumbfounded.” You can  see what happened to the two sons of Aaron who were guilty precisely of the arrogance of overestimating their mental/moral capabilities when they were described at the revelation on Mount Sinai as feasting their eyes on divine visions, breaching barriers that had been designed to prevent precisely such a disaster from occurring (compare Exodus 19,24 as well as 24,10). Death was decreed for them because they approached domains which were beyond what they were allowed to approach. This is the meaning of the opening lines of our Parshah.
    
    16,1. אחרי מות שני בני אהרן בקרבתם לפני ה' וימותו, “after the death of the two sons of Aaron who died because they approached  the presence of the Lord.” The communication by G’d to Moses mentioned here occurred immediately after the death of these two sons of Aaron. The meaning of the words בקרבתם לפני ה' is “while they were performing service before the Lord they died.” This is the opinion of Nachmanides. 
    Looking at the plain meaning of the text I believe that this verse reveals two separate sins these sons of Aaron were guilty of. One sin was of an intellectual nature, i.e. their thinking, their attitude. Death was decreed for them for that sin. This is the meaning of Tanchuma Acharey 6 that the verse in Exodus 24,11 that “G’d did not stretch out His hand against the nobles of Israel  who gazed at G’d and ate and drank,” meant that their punishment was placed in abeyance at that time. The words make it plain that these men were already guilty of death at that time. They were temporarily saved as G’d did not want to spoil the joy of the revelation, the giving of the Torah, at that time. This is all derived by inference because in this instance the Torah speaks of  בקרבתם instead of בהקריבם. The latter word means: “when they performed an act of offering, etc.” The former word means: “when they came close,” i.e. intellectually. The sin consisting of a deed was the offering of external fire which was not authorised for them to do, (Leviticus 10,1). They offered the fire without offering incense at the same time, seeing mention of their placing incense on their censers appears to refer to a separate action. We may therefore understand the verse in front of us as meaning: “after the death of the two sons of Aaron who had died seeing that G’d had decreed death for them because they were guilty of a sin involving thought when they had come too close before the Lord during the revelation at Mount Sinai feasting their eyes on a vision of G’d.” They died only on the first day of Nissan following (almost 10 months later) because of the additional sin in deed when they introduced external fire as an offering.
    When G’d spoke to Moses here He used both the form of address known as אמירה, and that known as דבור. Verse 1 mentions the latter, verse 2 the former kind of address. He was to tell Aaron (אמירה, in a friendly manner) that he and other priests must not enter the part of the Sanctuary which is beyond the dividing curtain except armed with incense. This is elaborated on in verses 12-13 where the Torah describes the cloud of incense covering the lid of the Holy Ark as insurance against Aaron (or whichever High Priest) dying during this procedure. If Aaron were to enter the Holy of Holies without the incense he would die just as his sons had died. Thus the sin (s) of the sons of Aaron was reported very explicitly by the Torah. Our portion testifies to this by writing that they entered without incense. This is the reason that Aaron was warned concerning the same matter.
    As a further proof reinforcing my opinion that this is the correct interpretation consider the following comment by the Midrash (Vayikra Rabbah 20,8) “Nadav and Avihu died because they brought external fire into the Holy of Holies before the Lord in the desert of Sinai, fire taken from their hearths” (compare Numbers 2,3). Did then the sons of Aaron die in the desert of Sinai? [actually they did seeing that the people did not leave that spot until the 20th of the second month of the second year (Numbers 10,11 Ed.] Did they not die in the Sanctuary, the Tabernacle? Answer: they died as a result of a decree which G’d had decreed while they were in the desert of Sinai (at the time of the revelation), i.e. a sin dating back to that occasion.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma Acharey 8): The emphasis of the text on the death of “two sons of Aaron dying”  [without naming them, Ed.] suggests that actually all four of his sons were guilty of death dating back to Aaron’s share in the sin of the golden calf. Moses prayed on their behalf resulting in two of Aaron’s sons being spared. All of this is based on Moses recalling in Deut. 9,19: “G’d was also angry enough at Aaron ready to wipe him out.” The word השמדה which is the one used by Moses at that time invariably involves the death of someone’s children. Example: Amos 2,9 ואשמיד פריו ממעל ושרשיו מתחת, “I will wipe out his fruit from above and his roots from below.” Seeing that Moses prayed, G’d responded to half of his prayer saying to him: “did I not write in My Torah (Exodus 22,8) ‘concerning every liability, whether an ox a donkey, a sheep, or a garment-regarding any lost item about which he said: ‘this is it!” To the court shall come both their claims. Whomever the court finds guilty shall pay double to his fellow.’” Someone who incurred guilt on account of an ox deserves to be punished. The prophet Ezekiel 23,20 already said that the Israelites exchanged their honour (G’d) for an ox. Anyone incurring guilt “on account of a donkey,” refers to the Egyptians whose flesh has been described by Ezekiel as the flesh of donkeys in that same verse; the ones referred to were the converts whom Moses allowed to convert at the time and who were the initiators in the golden calf being made. When the verse in Exodus continues with “guilt incurred on account of a lamb,” the reference is to the Jewish people who have been referred to as a lamb in Jeremiah 50,17 when the prophet speaks of “Israel the scattered sheep.” This too is a reference to the mixed multitude of converts who had initiated the process resulting in the golden calf and had dragged the Israelites into following their lead and becoming guilty of that sin. Regarding the reference to the garment in the verse in Exodus 22,8 this is a simile for the leaders of the people, the ones wearing the priestly garments. These garments have been referred to as describing their important wearers in Isaiah 3,6 “in whose father’s house there is clothing, come be a chief over us.” The words “concerning every lost object” in the verse in Exodus are a simile for people who have lost their way, and therefore are looking for a leader. The absence or failure of Moses to return when expected triggered the whole episode of the people wanting a replacement for him. The words “of which he says: ‘this is it,’” is a veiled reference to the Israelites saying about the golden calf: ‘this is your G’d O Israel who has taken you out of Egypt.’” The words “concerning which he says “this is he;” this is also a veiled reference to the instigators saying of the absent Moses “for this man Moses, etc.” (Exodus 32,1). The words “to a judge (court) shall come both their claims,” refers to Moses whom G’d had appointed as a judge for Pharaoh (Exodus 7,1). The people were to lay their problems in front of Moses and he would arbitrate them. The words: “whomever the court will find guilty”, refer to Aaron whom Moses had accused (declared guilty) saying to him: what did the people do to you that you brought this guilt upon them?” (Exodus 32,21).The words: “they shall pay twice to his fellow” is a reference to the two sons of Aaron who paid the price for his involvement in the affair of the golden calf. This is why the Torah wrote: ”the two sons of Aaron who died.”
     Tanchuma Acharey 1 exploits our verse to explain what Kohelet 9,2 referred to when Solomon wrote: “For the same fate is in store for all; for the righteous, and for the wicked; for the good and pure, and for the impure; for him who sacrifices, and for him who does not sacrifice; for him who is pleasing, and for him who is displeasing; and for him who swears, and for him who shuns oaths.” In that verse Solomon reviews his findings after he had looked at the history of man, had examined the relative fates of the righteous and the wicked. and had found that the righteous and the wicked share similar experiences “under the sun;” this is what Solomon referred to as “the evil which takes place under the sun” (Kohelet 9,3). The righteous of whom Kohelet speaks was Avraham of whom G’d had said in Genesis 18,19 “for I know him well, so that he will command his offspring to observe the path of the Lord to practice charity and justice,” etc. The “wicked” of whom Solomon spoke in Kohelet was Nimrod who instigated a rebellion against G’d throughout the world. Both of them died. This is whom Solomon had in mind when he said that the righteous and the wicked share the same fate. When Solomon added “and to the good,” he meant Moses; the Torah had reported of Moses that his mother “saw that he was good,” as soon as he was born (compare Exodus 2,2). When Solomon spoke about the “pure” in that verse in Kohelet he referred to David of whom it is written in Samuel I 16,12: “so they sent and brought him. He was ruddy-cheeked, bright eyed and handsome.” When speaking about the “impure” in Kohelet, Solomon referred to King Nevuchadnezzar. David laid the foundations of the Holy Temple and ruled for 40 years, whereas Nevuchadnezzar destroyed that Temple and also ruled for 40 years. The repetition of the words “the same fate is common to them all,” refers to the people who offer sacrifices to the Lord, i.e. Solomon, of whom we are told in Kings I 8,63 that he offered 22.000 cattle offerings at the consecration of the Holy Temple, whereas his successor Jerobam did not offer any sacrifices in that Temple. Not only that, Jerobam prevented the Israelites from making their pilgrimages to Jerusalem and the Temple. Solomon had continued in Kohelet that the “good” one i.e. Moses, experienced the same fate as the “sinner.” The good one he referred to was Moses whereas the sinner referred to the spies who had slandered the land of Israel. Both died and did not get to inherit that land. When Solomon added in Kohelet 9,3 that the one who renders an oath is equal to the one who does not, he meant Tzidkiyahu King of Yehudah whom Nevuchadnezzar blinded, (Chronicles II 36,13) as a result of his having dishonoured his oath of allegiance to him, whereas Samson who had not sworn an oath of allegiance to Israel’s enemies was also blinded  (by the Philistines Judges 15,12).
    An alternative way of explaining Kohelet 9,3: The words that the “good and the sinners” experience the same fate refers to the sons of Aaron being the good, whereas Korach and his rebellious colleagues are referred to as the sinners. The former were burned by heavenly fire (Numbers 16,38), whereas the sons of Aaron were burned by similar fire as reported in Leviticus 10,2.
    Concerning such similarities in the fates of the good and the wicked, Tanchuma Acharey 8 understands Elihu saying in Job 37,1: “because of this too, my heart quakes, and leaps from its place.” He wondered how it could be that a dry stick of wood which was deposited in the Sanctuary began to blossom and to bear fruit, (compare Numbers 17,22-23) whereas the sons of Aaron who entered there alive and offered a gift to G’d were burned instead and had to be removed from there as corpses? Rabbi Acha commented that Kohelet 2,2 which has Solomon saying: “I said of laughter ‘it is mad, and of joy what does it accomplish?’ that Solomon referred to the attribute of Justice.” 
    He himself had violated the three restrictions which the Torah imposes on the lifestyle of a Jewish king; 1) not to have too many wives, 2) not to have too many horses, and 3) not to amass too much gold and silver (Deut. 17,16). Solomon had 700 wives of full wifely status and three hundred concubines (Kings I 11,3); he had 40.000 stables for his horses (Kings I 5,6)  and such an amount of silver and gold that they did not bother to keep count of the silver (Kings I 10,27). When Solomon downplayed the value of joy, G’d said to him: ‘in that case what do you need this crown for?’ He suggested that he descend from his throne briefly. In the interval someone resembling the king ascended the throne and claimed to be Solomon. No amount of protest by Solomon helped, he was treated as if insane, beaten as a pretender to the throne, fed inferior food, etc., and became a refugee in his own kingdom. When all this befell him he was moved to exclaim (Kohelet 22,10) “this is my share after all my labours!” 
    Another explanation of the words in Kohelet 2,2 “I said of laughter it is madness:” This was the laughter by the attribute of Justice when it heard that Elisheva, wife of Aaron, prided herself on the morning of the first of Nissan of that year that she had merited four separate joyful occasions on that day; she had seen her husband appointed High Priest; her brother Nachshon had been elevated to the position of tribal head; her two oldest sons had been appointed as deputy High Priests; As soon as these two sons entered the Sanctuary they were burned to death. Solomon referred to the brief duration of Elisheva’s joy on that occasion and on the futility of enjoying such moments.
    The Midrash relates Job 39,27-30 to that event. We read there of G’d saying to Job: “does the eagle soar at your command, building high its nest, dwelling in the rock, lodging upon the fastness of a jutting rock? From there he spies out his food, from afar his eyes see it. His young gulp blood; where the slain are there is he.” In those verses G’d said to Job in effect; “if  you were able to command the eagle where and when to build his nest, then you would also be greater than Aaron at whose bidding I allowed My Shechinah to rest on top of the Holy Ark.” The various further similes such as “the fastness jutting out of a rock,” refer to the second Temple. The rock is a reference to the אבן שתיה which was the substitute in the second Temple for the Holy Ark, the kapporet and the cherubim of the first Temple and the Tabernacle. The reason that slab of stone was called אבן שתיה, “the stone of drinking,” was that the entire earth’s food supply is channeled by G’d through the site of where this stone is located. When the High Priest on the Day of Atonement prayed for the economic welfare of the Jewish people, he said: ”may it be Your will O Lord that the coming year will be one of dew and adequate rainfall, a year of plenty, a year of grace before You, a year of blessing, a year of successful business dealings, a year in which the Jewish people should not have to depend on one another for handouts nor for handouts from Gentile nations. May it be a year when the people should not try and impose their will on each other by force. Their eyes should be focused on distant targets,” i.e. they should know what would be at the end of the year.
     How would this blessing and the fact that it was granted be evident? If the smoke from the altar’s offerings rose in a southerly direction this would forecast prosperity for the people living in the south of the country. Similarly, if that smoke rose in a westerly direction it would signify prosperity for the Israelites living close to the sea. If it rose straight up, it would indicate that the whole country (or the whole world) would enjoy prosperity during that year. The נשר in that verse in Job is a simile for G’d who is described elsewhere as like an eagle having transported the Children of Israel out of Egypt for the first 120 kilometers on “eagle’s wings.” All of the complimentary comments in those verses in Job apply to Aaron. In spite of this great stature of Aaron, “his young gulp blood,” i.e. his sons died and yet he kept silent, did not question or complain as did Job when disaster struck him. The very presence of the Shechinah did not prevent the disaster. Thus far the Tanchuma.
    A kabbalistic approach: the wording of our text suggest that the sons of Aaron died two deaths seeing that the Torah writes וימותו, They died,” having already said it was after their מות, “death.” We have a somewhat similar construction where the word “life” is repeated as if it meant that someone should have two lives. Moses said in Deut. 33,6 יחי ראובן ואל ימות, “may Reuven live and not die.” These words are allusions to the transmigration of the souls, i.e. the implied multiple deaths of one and the same soul in different bodies. The subject as far as it concerns Nadav and Avihu is hinted at by he words “and they had not had any children” (Numbers 3,4).
    You are aware that if someone dies without having had children, his soul is potentially reincarnated in a different body. The Torah provides a clear hint of this when it writes in Leviticus 22,13: “and the daughter of a priest who will either become widowed or divorced and she had not had any (seed) children (from that husband) will return to her father’s house as in her youth and eat from the table of her father.” [The plain meaning of this is that she will be allowed to resume her status as priestess. Ed.] 
    Our author, having introduced this commentary as kabbalistic, views the words בת כהן in that verse as a reference to the soul (any soul) inasmuch as the soul descends from the emanation בינה on the left via the emanation (or attribute) .חסד on the right. The meaning of the words: “she will become widowed,” is that her soul will become widowed from its body, lose it, as a result she will be like a גרושה, a divorced woman, who cannot return to her roots in the event she does not have absorbed any seed from her husband. If she had absorbed seed from her husband she could not be totally divorced from her “husband,” i.e. soul. When the period of her enforced separation from her original partner (the body assigned to her soul originally) has been completed, she will return to her “father,” i.e. the source at G’d’s side whence all souls originate and she will partake of the “food”  she used to feed on at that time, i.e. enjoy the outpourings of the Shechinah.
    
    16,2. דבר אל אהרן אחיך ואל יבא בכל עת אל הקדש,  “speak to your brother Aaron -he shall not come at all times to the Sanctuary, etc.” The additional words: “so that he shall not die,” are an implied warning that what happened to his sons might otherwise happen to him. Our sages illustrated this by a parable, saying the matter is similar to a physician who enters the room of the patient telling him not to eat cold food and not to lie down on wet ground. A second physician comes and gives the patient similar instructions, adding: “so that you will not die like another patient who ignored this warning and died.” The second physician’s warning is more likely to be effective than that of the first. 
   כי בענן אראה על הכפורת, “for in a cloud I will appear above the kapporet.” The Torah was careful not to write: כי אראה בענן על הכפורת. Had the Torah written these words in that order the meaning would have been that G’d appears inside the cloud. If that were so, what distinction did the High Priest enjoy over the rest of the people of Israel? They all witnessed a Presence of the Lord within the cloud on a year-round basis, or at least every time the Torah wrote והנה כבוד ה' נראה בענן, “and here the glory of the Lord had appeared within the cloud.” This was an appearance visible to all the people. They did not have to enter any Sanctuary in order to become aware of it. There are several other instances where all the people witnessed such a manifestation of G’d’s glory (Exodus 33,10). In our verse the meaning of the words is that after Aaron enters the Sanctuary [Holy of Holies] in a cloud of incense the glory of G’d previously encased in the cloud will leave that cloud and take up its position on top of the kapporet. In order for us to understand this clearly, the Torah wrote the words אראה על הכפורת as a single sequence without interposing the word בענן. Actually, in that Holy of Holies the glory of G’d would be situated on top of the kapporet on the other days of the year also; only Aaron, or anybody else, were not allowed to enter that Inner Sanctuary except on Yom Kippur. The cloud of incense (which normally was offered in the Outer Sanctuary, daily,) was needed in order to ensure that Aaron would not behold that glory with fatal consequences for himself.
    Our sages (in Yuma 53) understand the words כי בענן אראה על הכפורת to mean that G’d’s glory would appear within the cloud of the incense. As a result of such considerations the incense had to be offered in the Holy of Holies (the site of the kapporet) The High Priest was not to make the entire incense ready before he entered. [the view of the Sadducees, whose High Priests were so scared that their mentors could have been wrong that they declined to perform this service on the Day of Atonement for fear of dying. Ed].
    In fact, the wording of verse 13 in our chapter, “the cloud of the incense shall cover the kapporet over the testimony” (the Holy Ark) will ensure that the High Priest will not die. It is stated clearly in the verse previous that the High Priest enter beyond the dividing curtain into the Inner Sanctuary before placing the incense on the fire. This is the reason why the Talmud, according to Rava, understands why this legislation was repeated. The first time the Torah had to issue the instructions not to enter at will. The second time was the warning that unless he performed in accordance with these instructions the High Priest would die.
    
    16,3. בזאת יבא אהרן אל הקדש, “equipped with the following Aaron shall enter the Sanctuary, etc.;” according to the plain meaning of the text the word בזאת means “with this attribute;” in other words, the list of sacrifices listed immediately after these words are the “attributes” Aaron did  take with him and performed the service  on Yom Kippur.
    A Midrashic approach based on Vayikra Rabbah 21,5: The letters in the word בזאת, which have a numerical value of 410, the number of years the First Temple was standing are an allusion to the service in the Sanctuary in that Temple when all the necessary paraphernalia were available, i.e. breastplate, urim vetumim, Holy Ark, kapporet, etc. The word יבא “he will come, or “it” will come, is an allusion to the Holy Temple (as opposed to the collapsible Tabernacle) that would hopefully be built soon after the Israelites occupy their own land.
    A kabbalistic approach: The word בזאת is a reference to כנסת ישראל, the spiritual concept represented by the Jewish people. The word יבא is proof that this is what the verse has in mind, i.e. that there will be a spiritual ascent leading to קדש, “sanctity,” i.e. the domain of true wisdom, the second highest emanation immediately below that of כתר. This emanation is the source of all blessing, and it is what David referred to when he wrote in Psalms 134,2: שאו ידיכם קודש וברכו את ה', “raise your hands towards the Sanctuary and bless the Lord” (normal translation). The sages steeped in mystical lore who were quoted in Vayikra Rabbah 21,5 mean that whenever the Torah mentions the word זאת, this occurs in connection with Israel fulfilling a commandment, such as the commandment of circumcision in Genesis 17,10 or the commandment of fulfilling the Torah in its entirety (Deut. 4,44), etc., etc. When the Torah uses the expression בזאת here, it emphasises that the measure of success Aaron (or any High Priest) may expect to accompany him on this Holy Day in his Holy Task are the “bundles” of commandments performed by the Israelites which he will “present” to the Lord on that occasion. The sacrificial offerings, are of course, included in the “bundles” of  commandments as the word זאת  here is followed by a list of these offerings. All of these “bundles” have one single destination, to be presented to the highest, the tenth of the emanations, to  כתר on the way to Hashem.
    
    16,4. כתנת בד קדש ילבש ומכנסי בד יהיו על בשרו ובאבנט בד יחגור ובמצנפת בד יצנוף, “He shall wear a sacred tunic; linen trousers shall cover his flesh; he shall gird himself with a linen sash, and cover his head with a linen turban.” The Torah mentions four linen garments, repeating the word בד, “linen” each time. Torat Kohanim, in justifying the repeated use of the word בד, comments:  the first time the word is used is to contrast it with the breastplate which was not of linen; the second time it is used was to contrast it with the ephod which was not of linen; the third time it was used was to contrast it with the robe, the מעיל, which did not contain linen; the fourth time it was used was to contrast it with the tzitz, head-band which was not made of linen. The four garments which did not contain linen, did contain gold. The Torah wanted to drive home the point that a material  which had once served to incriminate the people could not be used in exonerating them. This is why the four garments containing gold could not be worn inside the Inner Sanctuary. Interestingly, concerning all the garments which contained gold the Torah had written לפני ה', “before the Lord,” or “in the presence of the Lord” (compare Exodus 28,29; 28,12; 28,35; 28,38). Had the Torah not associated the description of these garments with the words “before the Lord,” which gave the impression that they were to be worn inside the Inner Sanctuary also, the extra words בד in our portion would not have been needed to make clear that when seeking expiation in the Holy of Holies for the sins of the Jewish people it was inappropriate to appear dressed in something which would remind G’d of the sin of the golden calf.
    The Torah emphasised that these linen garments were בגדי קדש, sacred garments, to teach that when the High Priest would wear them performing his duties in the Holy of Holies of the terrestrial Sanctuary this would parallel the service being performed in the celestial Sanctuary. If the High Priest on earth wore four garments when performing his service this corresponded to the four encampments of the Shechinah which similarly performed service in the Sanctuary in the celestial regions. Alternatively, the number four, i.e. four garments worn by the High Priest, were symbolic of the four holy chayot with their respective wings described in the opening vision of Ezekiel in Ezekiel chapter 1.
    Actually, the Torah could have been expected not to describe these garments as בגדי קדש but as בגדים קדושים, an expression meaning “sacred garments;” why did the Torah write בגדי קדש which should be translated as “garments of a sacred destination,” or “garments belonging to the Sanctuary,” or words to that effect? You will find this detail discussed in Vayikra Rabbah 21,10. The wording there is: “the service being performed in the celestial regions was to be duplicated in our terrestrial regions. The garments worn down here on earth symbolise those worn in the celestial regions which are קדש. Of those regions we are told that one man (the archangel Michael) is dressed in linen garments (Ezekiel 9,2). The vision of Ezekiel teaches that only linen garments were appropriate in the Inner Sanctuary, the House where G’d’s attribute of Mercy is at home.”
    If you will examine the word בד in greater detail you will find that within that word numerous wonderful concepts are alluded to. The word alludes to humility, simplicity; it alludes to G’d’s Unity; its colour, white, alludes to forgiveness, innocence; it also alludes to the קו האמצעי, the “middle,” or “central” line (in the emanations which are predominantly divided into “right” and “left.”) It also suggests submission seeing that flax sprouts from the earth in order to humble the High Priest, i.e. to remind him that even he is merely dust of the earth. This is in contrast to wool which is taken from living creatures, i.e. its origin is of a more elevated nature.
    We are told in Yuma 71 that the expression בד just as בד בבד, refers to plants growing as a single stalk not having any branches as do trees, etc. This is why the word alludes to the uniqueness, oneness, of G’d. He who communicates with Hashem as did the High Priest wears garments made of materials reflecting such an awareness. [Although the Talmud there discusses that each cord was  twisted of six threads, the word שש משזר is used in the Torah five times, whereas the word בד is used once, to indicate that this word sums up the symbolic meaning of flax or the linen made of it. Ed.]. By contrast, canvas, hemp, from which ropes are made, are fibres which grow outside, attached to the trunk of a tree, surrounding it. The numerical value of the letters in the word בד is 6. In the Torah a different word for linen is שש, which itself is an allusion to the sixth emanation, the קו האמצעי, the “middle line.” This is the line which forms the “bridge” between left and right.
    You have heard already that the two cherubs on the kapporet symbolise the letters ה and ו respectively in the tetragram. The High Priest represents the letter ו in that Holy Name. The letter ה, i.e. what it represents, the number 5, is included in the number 6, i.e. the letter ו. The number 6 which is the numerical value of the word בד symbolises that garments made of that material are fit to be worn in the Holy of Holies when the occasion arises.
    I believe there is another matter that deserves mentioning in  connection with our verse. It is well known that the human body is divided into three parts corresponding to the three parts of the universe, i.e. the terrestrial world, our earth, the domain of the galaxies, and the celestial spheres. The reason that our body reflects three such divisions is to make clear that man is indeed a microcosm. Through being such a microcosm, man, i.e. the High Priest, is able to draw unto himself the blessings from the celestial regions, and to convert the beneficial influences from the higher world for use in our terrestrial world. The immediate instrument helping to achieve this is the High Priest. When the High Priest wears linen trousers to cover his lower parts this represents the terrestrial predominantly physical part of the universe. The linen belt which the High Priest wears around his loins represents the “middle world,” the domain of the galaxies. The turban which he wears on his head represents the celestial spheres of the universe seeing the turban is worn on the head and the head symbolises the highest, most lofty spheres. This is the domain of the angels and is more distinguished than the other two parts of the universe. The order in which the garments are listed in our verse is that what is to be worn first is what is covering the lower part of the body, the other two pieces of clothing mentioned being in an ascending order. The order of putting on these garments directed the thoughts of the High Priest to progressively more lofty holy thoughts corresponding to the three layers of the universe. [I have not figured out why the author omits mention of the tunic in this analysis. Ed.]  It makes sense now why our verse begins with describing the garments as holy and concludes by repeating that the garments are holy.
    
    16,7. והעמיד אותם לפני ה', “and he will make them stand in the presence of the Lord, etc.” Both of these he-goats were a gift for Hashem, both before the lots had been drawn as well as after the lots had been drawn. To make this point quite clear the Torah wrote that the High Priest is to present both of them to the presence of Hashem. Even after the lots had been drawn and one of these he-goats had now been described as לעזאזל, “for a rocky place (identified with Satan),” the Torah continues writing יעמד חי לפני ה', “that the he-goat is to stand alive in the presence of Hashem (verse 10).” In other words, one must not think that the scapegoat was addressed as a gift to Satan; it too was addressed to Hashem though by a different route. The principal difference between the two he-goats was that the one consigned to Azzazel was not slaughtered but was consigned live to the desert similar to one of the birds of the offerings of the person afflicted with tzoraat (compare author’s comment on Leviticus 14,7). There is a further similarity with the heifer consigned to virgin earth and killed in the process which was to atone for any negligence which might have contributed to the murder by a person unknown of the slain person described in Deut. 21,4. That heifer had to be “virginal,” had not been used as a beast of burden or otherwise made to perform tasks for its owner.
    It is most certainly not the intention of the Torah to suggest that this scapegoat be presented to Satan as an offering, a sacrifice. There simply is no sacrificial service performed in Judaism whose address is not Hashem, G’d’s essence, not even any of the lesser attributes of G’d. [as the author has been at pains to point out repeatedly. Ed] After all, what sense would Exodus 22,19 make where we are told that if someone offers a sacrifice to any one other than G’d in His capacity as the tetragram exclusively he would be guilty of death? Does then the Torah contradict itself in Leviticus reneging on what was written in Exodus? In Exodus the Torah was at pains to state that even a sacrifice with the address “ELOHIM” was a no no! If even sacrifices addressed to G’d’s intermediaries are rejected, how much more so would an offering to Satan be rejected?  Addressing a sacrifice to Azzazel, read Satan, would be violating the verse in Proverbs 21,27: “the sacrifice of a wicked man is an abomination.” Directing a sacrifice to the wrong address not only does not result in G’d’s grace but drives a wedge between man and G’d, is an abomination! 
    The fact that the Azzazel will become a beneficiary of a sacrifice which we presented to the Lord, i.e. to Hashem in accordance with His instructions, does not need to bother us as long as that secondary beneficiary is not the address of that sacrifice. The High Priest first offered the two he-goats as a gift to the Lord. The very fact that the decision which of these he-goats would arrive at its ultimate address via the detour of the Azzazel was determined by lot made it impossible to accuse the High Priest, i.e. Israel, as having aimed one of the animals as a gift, bribe, or whatever, to the Azzazel. It was as if G’d had determined by means of the lot, which of these two animals was to travel to its ultimate destiny via a detour. If the High Priest in sanctifying the two animals had said: ‘this one is for Hashem and this one is for Azzazel,” he would have compared the two, thus becoming guilty of performing a procedure which could be interpreted as offering an offering to an idolatrous destination. Seeing that the choice was determined by lot, it was as if G’d had decided which of the two animals was to make this detour via the Azzazel. While the animal was consigned to a location known as Azzazel, this was not the same as addressing it to the concept ”Azzazel.” (compare Nachmanides on verse 8 in our chapter).
    Our sages in Yuma 41 determined that in the event that the High Priest had failed to perform the procedure of drawing lots which of the two animals was to serve as the scapegoat and which was to be slaughtered for burning on the altar, the entire Yom Kippur service is voided. In other words, the drawing of lots was an integral part of the entire service.
    From a strictly linguistic point of view, פשט, the word לעזאזל means “hard,” a word related to the word עזוז, obstinacy. The location was a relatively high mountain, a rock, an uninhabited place, in the desert, as the Torah mentions in verse 22. (compare Rashi and Torat Kohanim Sifra Acharey 2,8).
    A Midrashic approach found in Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 46: Satan was complaining that whereas G’d had given him authority over all the nations He had not given him any control over the Jewish people. G’d responded that on one day a year, namely, on Yom Kippur, he, Satan would have authority over the Jewish people in the event the latter were sinful [I suppose it means that if they did not repent on that day and observed it properly. There could hardly be a question that they entered the day in a state of sin. Ed.] The Israelites were given an opportunity to satisfy the aspirations of Samael by offering him a bribe. Whereas the offering presented to G’d was a burnt-offering, the one offered to Samael (Azzazel) was the sin-offering  which was burdened with all the sins of the people of Israel. This gift to Samael was designed to deflect his intention to thwart the value of Israel’s offering on that day. By “playing up to the ego of Samael,” G’d hoped to neutralise him through flattery so that the purpose of the Day of Atonement could be achieved without interference from that source. When, as a result of receiving the “bribe,” Samael realised that on that day the Israelites were like angels, not eating, not drinking, etc., he too joined the chorus of Israel’s admirers telling G’d that Israel were as free from sin as are the ministering angels. Once G’d hears the testimony of our perennial accuser, He grants atonement to the people, to the priests, and the entire congregation. Thus far Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer.
    Our author now addresses a difficulty in the text of that Midrash where he does not know what to make of the word יקריב in the line “this is why one gives a bribe to Samael so that לא יקריב את קרבנם,” which we translated “so that he would not try to thwart the value of our offering.” The text in our amended version of the Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer does not have either the word יקרב or יקריב which bothers our author. [I will therefore omit his attempt at dealing with this problematic wording. Our text reads שלא לבטל את קרבן של ישראל, and is not problematic at all. Ed.]
    The wordעזאזל  continues to exercise the mind of our author who claims to follow the approach of Nachmanides in this regard. He suggests that it is a form of reinforcing the meaning of the word עז, strong, hard, obstinate. He also claims that Satanic forces to the extent that they too are rooted in the Divine seeing that there are no competing forces to G’d unless G’d Himself had created them and given them their authority, always end with the letters אל, a form of the name of G’d. The word עזאזל could be understood as equivalent to עזי-אל “my strength is G’d-like,” or something to that effect. He finds an allusion to Satanic forces being described as “strong, hard, חזק,” in the words of the Psalm 35,10 מציל עני מחזק ממנו, “He (the Lord) saves the poor from forces stronger than he” (the reference being to Samael). We find G’d described as עזוז וגבור, in Psalms 24,8. This is a redoubling of the normal עז, for “strong, tough,” etc. The word עזאזל may reflect the evil urge=Satan, Samael,  (Baba Batra 16) in its most potent form. Our sages have told us that “Satan” and “evil urge” are merely two different words describing the same phenomenon.  The word סמאל, Samael, Satan, also has a connotation of שמאל, “left,” as it places itself to the “left” side of a person, its potential victim. In addition the letters in סמאל remind one of something “hidden,” סמיות, and are reminiscent of the Torah writing that “bribes blind the eyes of even the intelligent and normally discriminating” (compare Deut. 16,19). In Bereshit Rabbah 65,10 the word עונותם in verse 22 is read as עונות איש תם, a veiled reference to Yaakov who is described in the Torah as איש תם, (Genesis 25,27).
    Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer deals with the phenomenon at length as we have described already. An additional meaning of the word עזאזל is derived if we break up the word into two words עז אזל,  meaning “the powerful one has already gone away;” [the meaning is that due to being presented with the scapegoat the effectiveness of Samael-Satan-Azzazel has been broken. Ed.] If you will count the words from the first time the word עזאזל appears in our chapter (16,8-17,7) to the word לשעירים, you will find a total of thirty-three verses. This prompted Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra to comment that there are mystical aspects to this phenomenon which one cannot understand until one reaches the age of 33. He considers the key word in the procedure the word המדברה, “to the desert,” in verse 10. The message is that when the scapegoat is dispatched to the desert, an uninhabited region, the sins with which it has been laden will end up in a region where they cannot cause any damage, cannot contaminate human beings who come into contact with sins or sinners. Thus far Ibn Ezra.
    When you consider all that we have written and quoted on this subject you will be convinced that there most certainly cannot be a question of the scapegoat being an offering, a sacrifice to a Satanic force called Azzazel. All strife, war, etc., in the world have their origin in that domain where Satan-Sa-ir, the other name for Esau and the negative character traits he symbolises, reign supreme. This is the force which welcomes this scapegoat laden with sin. All goats both male and female are part of his domain. The nearest “relative” of this Satan-Samael-Azzazel is Esau and the nation descended from it. Esau already bore the name שעיר, a hairy man, as the antithesis of Yaakov the “smooth” man. The land in which he settled was named after him, and when pagans used to offer sacrifices to the שעירים, the he-goats, representing brute physical force and obstinacy, this was their way of paying homage to the ideals represented by Esau. 
    According to Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 27 Samael started out as a respectable angel in the celestial regions until he and his colleagues were expelled from there by G’d Himself. As a form of protest Samael held on to the wings of the archangel Michael trying to prevent his expulsion, or to drag that angel down to earth with him. G’d saved the archangel Michael and this is why that archangel became known as מיכאל הפליט, “Michael the escapee” (a veiled reference to who it was that told Avraham that Lot had been taken captive by the kings who had defeated the king of Sodom and his allies). We were told in Genesis 14,13 that the פליט came and informed Avraham that his relative Lot had been taken captive. Considering the fate of Azzazel-Samael, we know that he ended up at the lower end of the emanations which we associate with the celestial regions or domains. In fact, as the result of his expulsion from heaven, Samael constitutes a barrier between earth (the lowest of the emanations, מלכות), and heaven, i.e. the destination of the sacrifices. How can our sacrifices reach heaven when Samael forms an effective barrier to their ascent to heaven? In the words of Solomon in Proverbs 26,13 Samael is like a שחל בדרך, “a type of lion barring one’s progress.” Presenting this scapegoat to Samael is like throwing a bone to the dog, keeping it happy while one pursues one’s main objective. The Torah did the same thing when instructing us to dispatch the scapegoat to the domain of Samael in order to pave the way for our sacrifices to Hashem to ascend to heaven without hindrance and interference. This is why the author of Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 46 wrote that the purpose of the scapegoat procedure is to prevent Samael from interfering with our offerings.
    It is important for the Jewish people to be aware of the existence of forces such as represented by the Azzazel and only in this manner are they able to deal with such a phenomenon. This was not the first time that normally hostile forces turned supportive. We encounter the phenomenon for the first time in Exodus 11,7 where the Torah tells us that the very dogs which could have been counted on to impede the departure of the Jewish people from Egypt kept their mouths shut and did not interfere with the Exodus. [According to tradition the dogs were rewarded by the Torah in that the Torah instructs us to throw meat unfit for us to eat to the dogs (Exodus 22,30 compare Rashi). It is not a new  idea that the Torah suggests neutralising potentially hostile forces by feeding their appetite. Ed.]
    To sum up: it is not forbidden in principle to feed the appetite of our adversaries (placed there by G’d Himself) as long as we do not feed their appetites at the expense of our spiritual integrity [my phrasing, Ed.], and as long as we perform such a procedure at G’d’s command; the reason is that by doing so we are like servants of the Lord who share out gifts on behalf of the Lord to ministers of the Lord in order for those ministers not to object to the way the Lord wants to deal with us. This point is reinforced by the fact that until after the drawing of the lot it was not even clear which of the two he-goats would be dispatched to the Azzazel. The lot saying “for G’d” or “for the Azzazel” respectively would sometimes fall on the animal to the right of the High Priest and sometimes on the animal on his left. The High Priest was not allowed to change the determination made by the lot.
    The Talmud Yuma 40 reports that they asked Rabbi Akiva once whether if the lot with the word “for G’d” fell on the animal to the left of the High Priest he was allowed to change it so that it would fall on the animal to his right (as usually happened); Rabbi Akiva answered that this was not permitted as it would provide a pretext for the heretics to claim that Azzazel and G’d were two separate domains, independent of each other. This is why the decision by the lot had to be honored although, according to tradition, the animal on the Priest’s right was to be offered as the sacrifice in the Temple. The heretics did not appreciate that the procedure was a decree from G’d and if He were willing to forego the animal intended as a sacrifice for Him, He was entitled to do so. If and when G’d waives His right, He does so for our benefit. At any rate, it is clear from all the above that the Israelites on their own do not give anything to Azzazel. All the Israelites and, of course the High Priest, direct all their thinking, prayers, and confessions only to the Lord, to the attribute represented by the tetragram.
    When we review what Manoach had done in Judges 13,20  when the angel ascended to heaven within the flame of his offering, he did not, G’d forbid, address himself to the angel, but he addressed himself to Hashem, hence his terrible fear that he would die as a result of having seen such a manifestation of the Lord.
    The same consideration holds true for the gifts apportioned to the priests from the various sacrificial offerings for their consumption.  Even though Aaron and his sons quite obviously enjoyed these portions of meat, etc., this is not part of the sacrificial service anymore pertaining to the owners of the animals whose blood and fat parts have been offered on the altar; the owners have simply carried out the will of the Lord in leaving these parts for the priests. By no means does G’d and the priest share in the offerings as “principals.” The entire offering is addressed to the Lord, exclusively.
    16,14. על פני הכפרת קדמה ולפני הכפרת יזה שבע פעמים, “in front of the kapporet to the east as well as in front of the kapporet (west?).” There were a total of eight sprinklings of blood on Yom Kippur. Seven were aimed at the lower half of the Holy Ark and one at the upper half. Let me try and explain the symbolism in these sprinklings. The first sprinkling aimed at the Holy Ark was directed at the highest emanations which include the emanation of חכמה and בינה, “wisdom and insight.” The seven subsequent sprinklings aimed at the Holy Ark were to symbolise the remaining seven lower emanations.
    
    We have been taught in Yuma 53 that the High Priest had to count aloud while performing these sprinklings. This was the formula: “one; one and one; one and two; one and three; one and four; one and five; one and six; one and seven.” When the High Priest said: “one,” he meant the upper three emanations which were treated as one group. When he said: “one and one,” he referred to the first sprinkling which was in respect of the three higher emanations plus the first of the sprinklings in respect of the highest of the seven lower emanations. He continued in that vein to the end. The Talmud there (folio 55) states that though there is a disagreement among the scholars concerning the subsequent countings, they are all agreed that the initial counting is obligatory. Concerning the question why the High Priest always had to repeat the reference to the first sprinkling, i.e. repeating the word אחת each time, Rabbi Eleazar says that it was to ensure he would not make a mistake in the procedure. Rabbi Yochanan says that that this was based on our verse where the Torah wrote that seven sprinklings had to take place in front of the kapporet. He considered the word יזה the second time in that verse as redundant, seeing the verse had said earlier והזה, “he shall sprinkle.” As a result of the extra word Rabbi Yochanan considers the count accompanying the sprinkling procedure as obligatory and crucial, meaning that if the High Priest failed to count in this manner the whole procedure would be invalidated. We need to understand why, according to Rabbi Yochanan, the count in this fashion is so essential. According to Rabbi Yochanan even if the High Priest did not make a mistake in the procedure the fact that he did not count in the approved manner makes his service invalid. The Torah attributed so much importance to the sprinkling of this blood on and against the Holy Ark instead of merely on the Altar in the Sanctuary that the counting of the procedure became so important. The very name of the lid of the Ark i.e. כפרת indicates the ability of contributing to atonement which was part of the latent power of the Ark, the Lid and the Cherubs. (compare Tanchuma Vayakhel 10) .
    
    16,16. השכן אתם בתוך טומאתם, “that dwells with them amidst their contamination.”  Even though the Jewish people are contaminated the Shechinah is amongst them (Sifra Acharey  4, 5). This is the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah in the Talmud Sukkah   where he states his view that one may cover the Sukkah with material which is subject to becoming contaminated, although his view is not shared by the other scholars. He based his opinion on the text in our verse.
    We also have an opinion in Sanhedrin 37 according to which the words וירח את ריח בגדיו, “he inhaled the fragrance of his clothing” (Genesis 27,23) are understood as  וירח את ריח בוגדיו, “he inhaled the fragrance of those who betray Him,” i.e. even though the person concerned is contaminated, seeing that they are Jews G’d does not totally reject them. Another allegorical approach along these lines is found in Shemot Rabbah 33,2 where the word עלית למרום שבית שבי  (Psalms 68,19) are understood to mean that even if there were unfit Jews amongst the people this did not stop the Shechinah from being amongst them. The Midrash understands the words as a rebuttal to the Gentiles who believe that because Jews have served idols at one time they are forever cut off from G’d’s grace.
    Another comment by the Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 18,8) on the words of Maleachi 2,16: “for I detest divorce- said the Lord G’d of Israel,” points to the fact that the prophet Maleachi when mentioning G’d always uses the expression אלוקי צבאות, and only in this instance does he refer to G’d as אלוקי ישראל, “the G’d of Israel.” The author of the Midrash sees a clear message in this that the prophet wanted to reassure the people that G’d’s presence does not abandon the Jewish people even when they are sinful.
    
    16,17. וכל אדם לא יהיה באהל מועד, “No one shall be in the Tent of Meeting, etc.” Our sages in the Jerusalem Talmud Yuma 1,5 commented that even the creatures (angels) who have been described as having the likeness of אדם פני  in Ezekiel 1,10 must also not be present in the Inner Sanctuary at the time Aaron performs this service. What a wonderful stature did the High Priest possess if he was allowed in a place where even angels were not allowed! This confirms that the High Priest was indeed מלאך ה' צבאות, “an  angel of the Lord of Hosts” (compare Maleachi 2,7).
    The Sadducee High Priest (Yuma 19) who was struck down by the angel because he had arranged the fire and incense before entering the Inner Sanctuary had already left the Sanctuary before the angel struck him down. According to Rabbi Chiya a sound was heard in the courtyard, עזרה, at that time. When the other priests entered to see what had caused this sound they found a calf’s foot between the feet of that High Priest. The reason this happened to this High Priest was because he ignored the instructions of the sages that there is a tradition not to enter the Sanctuary with the incense already fixed on top of the fire in the censer. The reason for the traditional procedure was because of the fragrance which was so important at the time when the incense was prepared. The High Priest in question wanted to defy the tradition; this is why he was punished. May the Lord save us from punishment and requite us for the sake of His righteousness.
    
    16,21. איש עתי, “a man designated for this particular task.” Our sages understand the word איש in this instance to mean that even a non-priest was fit for this task (Yuma 66). The word עתי means that even if the man was in a state of ritual impurity (temporarily) this did not disqualify him for this task. The man, even if impure, was allowed to enter the courtyard of the Temple in order to dispatch the scapegoat. The word עתי also means that the procedure transcends the laws of the Sabbath. The Torah means that if for some reason that scapegoat takes sick, the designated man may carry him to its destination on his shoulder. If the animal remained in good health it most certainly could be carried on the Sabbath as it is not forbidden to carry animals capable of walking, on the Sabbath. Even if the animal is sick and therefore as if tied up, unable to walk, the procedure is carried out on the Sabbath. All this is part of the meaning of the word עתי.
    
    16,23. והניחם שם, “and he shall leave them there.” He is not to use these garments again on the following Yom Kippur. Our sages (in Yuma 24) said that the source for the ruling that garments worn by the High Priest on one Day of Atonement must not be worn again on another Day of Atonement are the words והניחם שם. This expression means that they have to be hidden forthwith. They added that the combined weight of these garments totaled 18 מנה, (והניחם= יח מנה) 450 shekel. A further allusion to the fact that these garments were not to be used again is found in Jerusalem Talmud Yuma 7 by Rabbi Chiya who derives from the word ולבשם, “and to wear them,” i.e. the combination of the letters in that word, that ובלו שם that these garments are “to rot there”. This is an outright indication that these garments are not to be used again.
    
    16,30. כי ביום הזה יכפר עליכם לטהר אתכם, “for on this day he (the High Priest) will provide atonement for you to purify you, etc.” This verse is an assurance for Jews throughout the generations that the Day of Atonement is a day set aside especially for forgiveness and pardon. On that day the Israelites will be cleansed of all their sins against the Lord. Yom Kippur is ineffective, however, in bringing about forgiveness, atonement, etc., for sins committed against fellow human beings. Only after the person guilty of such sins has been granted forgiveness by the person whom he has wronged will G’d add His forgiveness.
    When the High Priest used to recite his confessional on Yom Kippur, he would recite this verse in his prayer. The name of G’d referred to in this verse is the one comprised of 42 letters. This is why we use the formula לפני ה' תטהרו on Yom Kippur in our prayers (a substitution for the tetragram we are not allowed to utter). The words mean לפני שם מ'ב “before the 42-lettered name of the Lord.”  The name consists of seven words, the first six representing aspects of the attribute of Mercy, whereas the seventh word represents the attribute of Justice. This is the opinion of my teacher the Rashba. This 42-lettered name is broken down into six times 7 words according to some, whereas others break it down into 14 words of three letters each. [You will find the former version printed before the Sabbath eve hymn לכה דודי, as a prayer beginning with the words אנא בכח. This dates back to the Ari zal. Ed.] This prayer was most appropriate as the Day of Atonement is a day on which the attribute of Mercy achieves prominence within the framework of the attribute of Justice. The seventh of the 10 emanations, counting from the bottom מלכות up is גבורה or דין, the attribute of Justice. On that day the High Priest had to plead with the attribute of Justice, i.e. with the Judge  who was presiding over all of mankind parading in front of Him, determining their fates for the coming year [if it had not already been decided on Rosh Hashanah. Ed.] The 42-lettered name of G’d is the one He employed while calling the universe into existence. By means of this name G’d extracted a ראש, beginning from the letter ב which symbolised בהו, the state of chaos prevailing amongst the universe’s raw materials prior to G’d’s first directive that there be light. [There are 42 letters in the opening words of Bereshit. They conclude with the letter ב in the word ובהו in the first verse, compare בראשית ברא אלהים את השמים ואת הארץ והארץ היתה תהו וב. The message is that up until that point all was chaos. At that point, i.e. #42, G’d intervened and began to create an orderly universe. Ed.] The first three letters (i.e. the first three words of the prayer אנא בכח גדולת ימינך, the one composed of 42 words corresponding to the 42-lettered name of G’d, begin with the first three letters in the aleph bet. When added to one another 1+2+3 =6 they allude to the six days during which the universe was created, the six directions there are, i.e. north, east, south, west, up and down; these directions are also considered the “seal” of the Creator as I explained in connection with the word יום הששי on Genesis 1,31. The seventh word, commencing with the letter ש, [what is meant is the beginning of the last line in the אנא בכח prayer starting with the word שועתנו, Ed.] meaning אש, is an allusion to the seventh emanation i.e. the attribute of Justice. [At this point the author deals with the meaning of the vowel shuruk which serves as signature of G’d, etc. I confess I have not understood this. Ed.]
     Some of our sages believe that Aaron mentioned the tetragram (and not the 42-lettered name of G’d during his prayer). Rabbi Saadyah gaon belongs to that group of scholars. According to these scholars, when we say in our prayers on Yom Kippur the words לפני ה' תטהרו, this is a reference to what the High Priest said on that day, similar to when the Mishnah describing the count of the sprinkling by the High Priest quoted him by prefacing his words with: וכך היה אומר. Naturally, we are not allowed to repeat the exact word used by the High Priest when he said it, therefore in our prayer we allude to it by saying “this is (similar to) what he said when he was in the presence of Hashem.” In fact, the High Priest uttered the tetragram on ten separate occasions during his service on that day. Yuma 39 writes: “the High Priest uttered the tetragram ten times during the course of Yom Kippur; the first three times he uttered that name when reciting the first confession recited over the bull, when he commenced with the words אנא השם וגו'. The second time he uttered the tetragram was when he recited the second confession over the he-goat, which was offered on the altar. During that confession he also uttered the Holy Name three times. The third time was when he recited the confessional on behalf of all the people over the scapegoat to be consigned to the desert. Here too he uttered the Holy Name three times. The last time he uttered that name was when he drew the lots.” You will find that the Torah mentions the tetragram ten times in our paragraph commencing with 16,2, followed by verse 7, followed by verse 8, followed by verse 9; we find that name again in verse 10, followed by verse 12, followed by verse 13. In verses 18, 30 and 34 the tetragram again appears in our chapter.
    We feel that the first opinion, the one speaking of the 42-lettered name of G’d being used by the High Priest is likely the correct one. This is why in our liturgy of Yom Kippur the wording is: “when the people outside the Temple heard the High Priest utter the holy name of G’d etc., they would prostrate themselves and proclaim G’d’s majesty using he words we use daily after the first line of the קריאת שמע, i.e. ברוך שם כבוד מלכותו לעולם ועד, “blessed be the name of His glorious Majesty forever and ever.” When the paytan, composer of this piece of liturgy, refers to בקדושה ובטהרה, he did not mean that the people would pronounce the tetragram as the High Priest had done. He meant that the thoughts of reverence filling the minds of the people at that moment were holy and reverent but they had not heard the tetragram pronounced.
    This is also the meaning of our sages known as חכמי המרכבה, (a group of Kabbalists ) when they said that “the names of G’d are not actually uttered in holiness but the person thinking about them is filled with holy thoughts when he does so.” The idea seems to be that the very air into which such words would be exhaled when someone utters them by mouth will contaminate he holiness of that name. If that were to happen the Holy Name of the Lord would have been desecrated. This is why even the High Priest when he started to  form the letters of the tetragram with his lips immediately “swallowed” it, not allowing the fully formed word to escape into the air around him. [he was reciting the confession while standing outside where the air was certainly less holy than inside. Ed.] compare verse 7, “at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, the Sanctuary.” I have heard that the “swallowing” consisted of the individual words alluding to the Unity of G’d, i.e. words containing the letters in the word י-ה-ו-ה, to appear  with the vowel pattern familiar from the word אליהו הנביא, or ישעיהו הנביא, and similar examples. In other words, the meaning of “swallowing the letters,” is to pronounce them with vowels other than the ones designated for them. This is also the meaning of the expression מבליעין described in Kidushin 71 where the Talmud says that the name of G’d consisting of 12 letters must not be revealed to anyone except the most chaste of the priests. The name consisting of 42 letters was revealed only to people possessing the following three qualities: 1) chastity, 2) humility, 3) at least 35 years old, 4) not given to anger, 5) not given to drunkenness. 6) not insisting on what he feels is his due. The chaste priests to whom the 12-lettered name of G’d had been revealed would “swallow” it i.e. utter it at a time when because of the four-lettered name of G’d uttered by the other priests at the same time the 12-lettered name could not be heard or identified by the listeners.
    
    According to the opinion of those who hold that the High Priest did indeed utter the tetragram he did so using the traditional vowel pattern, even though the ultimate holiness of that name is dependent on the vowel pattern [the one we have changed and is read as elohim, especially when the letters of the tetragram (consonants) appear in the Books of the Prophets. Ed.] There is a tradition amongst the Kabbalists that when the Holy Name is divulged to qualified students this is done only על המים, near the water; this is based on Psalms 29,3: “the voice of the Lord is over the waters.” In other words, the waters are to act as purifying agent for the name when it is “handed over,” much as a ritual bath acts as a purifying agent.
    
    17,4. דם יחשב לאיש ההוא, דם שפך, “it will be considered as bloodshed for that man, he has shed (innocent) blood.” The severity of this legislation must be viewed against a background of ante-diluvial times. Before the deluge the lives of the animals were sacrosanct, i.e. man was not allowed to eat meat, only fruit and vegetables; we know this from Genesis 1,29: “here I have given you all herbage yielding seed that is on the surface of the entire earth, and every tree that has seed-yielding fruit; it shall be yours for food.” When, in the wake of man’s general corruption, the animals became corrupt also, and were saved from the deluge by Noach, man acquired the right to eat meat. This is why we need a prohibition here that such animals unless they had first been designated as sacrifices and been slaughtered as such, are prohibited to the Jewish people on pain of the karet penalty. Seeing that animal sacrifice substitutes for man’s dying for his sins, if such an animal has been killed for secular consumption, it is considered as if the killer had killed a human being. The status of the Israelites in the desert had much in common with the status of Adam in Gan Eden before the sin so that slaughtering an ox was similar to killing a human being (Isaiah 66,3, and Nachmanides on verse 11 in our chapter).
    
    17,7. ולא יזבחו עוד את זבחיהם לשעירים, “so that they will no longer offer their sacrificial offerings to the (he-goats) demons.” While the Israelites were exiled in Egypt they were enthusiastic followers of that particular cult in order to gain some advance knowledge of what was in store for them in the future. This particular cult was known by the name שעירים because the people worshipping it either dressed up as he-goats or because people’s hair would stand on edge from fright when they beheld the worshippers of that cult. Alternatively, these apparitions were known as שדים, demons, because they would dwell in regions which are not inhabited by man such as wildernesses, deserts, regions too cold for humans to be comfortable in. These “demons” were primarily composed of only 2 of the 4 elements which man is made of, i.e. of fire and air (spirit). Seeing that they are also light in weight they can fly all over at will. At the time of their creation they were composed of only two elements instead of the four elements which human beings, animals, as well as the plants have in common. As a result, instead of possessing solid bodies such as human beings and animals which therefore are tangible and easily recognisable, these demons are of such transparent shape that they cannot be easily seen and identified. However, they are able to assume a visible form when they so desire by “dressing up” as if they were humans or animals. Their “bodies” are essentially spiritual in nature The creatures composed of four elements are germane to their environment being a composition of the elements in which they exist, i.e. earth, and they fall sick when the correct balance of their four elements is disturbed so that they die as a result and the respective elements disintegrate each to merge again with its constituent part. These demons  experience a similar fate when there is an imbalance in the two elements they consist of.
    This is what our sages (Chagigah 16) meant when they said that we have been told of six features possessed by these demons to help us identify them. In three respects they are like human beings, whereas in another three respects they are like angels, i.e. disembodied creatures. These demons have wings, can fly, and have foreknowledge of future events just like the angels. Their “knowledge” is not the result of their intelligence; rather they have overheard such information which abounds in the celestial regions originating with G’d. G’d reveals such information to the mazzalot, horoscopes, etc. The demons overhear this being able to move in those regions. In fact it is logical that the demons possess such “knowledge.” If even birds are aware of future events and communicate them by means of their twittering (and the diviners came by their foreknowledge of events through having learned to decipher the twittering of the birds) then the demons which fly much higher in much more rarefied regions than the birds are certainly privy to such information, getting their information from the planets in charge of the various mazzalot. Whatever knowledge of impending events either the birds or the demons possess relates only to events in the near term; neither birds nor demons have foreknowledge of events in the distant future.
    The three areas in which these demons are closer to human beings are that they eat and drink like human beings, they procreate like human beings, and they die like human beings. The Talmud did not mean that the demons eat the kind of food humans eat. Seeing that humans are composed of four elements some very tangible and substantive, the food requirements of humans are similar, i.e. man requires what is known as “solid food.” The demons being composed of very “light” elements only naturally do not require “solid” food. Their requirements are limited to fragrances needed by the fire in their components and by moisture to replenish the moisture lost through its close association with fire, its other component. The fire dried out some of the natural moisture of the air; hence this moisture needs replacement. The reason the sages in the Talmud compared the eating of the demons to our eating habits is only to describe that just as man’s body  uses up fat if he does not eat, and liquid if he does not drink and replaces those sources of energy in order to  revive these vital parts, so the demons need to eat and drink because of parallel considerations. The matter of fire consuming water is illustrated in Kings I 18,38 where the prophet describes the fire consuming the sacrifices Elijah offered as also consuming the water in which the animals had been drenched as well as the moat he built around the altar. When people (pagans) burn up sacrifices to these demons they do so in order to feed them. The smoke from the animals being burned provide the fragrance and the moisture these demons require. Seeing they receive benefit from what people do for them, the demons in return tell people of events about to happen. The discipline which studies these phenomena is known as “necromancy.” Concerning the “death” of these demons which the Talmud speaks of and compares to the death of human beings, what they mean is simply that parts (elements) which are fused into living tissue combining all these elements disintegrate after death. The parts making up the creature known as demon similarly disintegrates at some point. When it does this is called the “death” of the demon.
    Regarding the matter of demons “flying,” described in the Talmud as comparable to the flight of the angels,  this is due to the lightness of their bodies, If birds can fly then these demons obviously can fly even better. After all, the bodies of the birds are composed of all four basic elements and all have to be transported by their wings.
    
    17,11. כי נפש הבשר בדם הוא ואני נתתיו לכם על המזבח, “for the soul of the flesh is in the blood and I have assigned it for you on the Altar.” Nachmanides provides a number of reasons to account for the prohibition to consume blood. One is that the blood is the part of the animal consecrated for G’d, i.e. sprinkled on the Altar, just as certain fat parts of the animals which are also prohibited even in animals which were not offered as sacrifices (compare Leviticus 3,16). As to the prohibition of the blood of free-roaming beasts (which are not fit as sacrifices) the Torah did not see fit to forbid the blood of some animals while permitting that of others. It is a decree designed to prevent us from making an error as to which blood may be eaten.
    Another reason for the prohibition of blood is that the blood represents the essence of the animal and G’d had never permitted that the essence (soul) of an animal be eaten. Only the meat had been permitted. When G’d permitted Noach the consumption of animals this was because having saved the animals Noach had acquired a right to their bodies. However, G’d permitted only he bodies of the animals not their life-force (soul). It is altogether not appropriate to mix human life-forces with animal life-essence. A nation such as a Jewish people, recipients of the holy Torah, must preserve the purity of their bodies so that they can receive input from intelligence emanating in the celestial spheres Furthermore, we have been commanded to train ourselves to be merciful, soft-hearted, and not cruel. If we were to eat the blood we would assimilate animalistic tendencies within us and become cruel, ultimately resembling animals more than angels. The fact is that food consumed is assimilated by the body even though it is converted, transformed in the process. Character traits possessed by animals will surface in people eating their blood. According to the view expressed by Nachmanides the digestive process involving the assimilation of blood is different from that of converting meat-tissue; seeing it requires less of a process of digestion, more of the original enters our bloodstream and affects our tendencies.
    All of these considerations caused the Torah to write: “for the personality of the flesh (in each respective animal) resides within its blood.” Life-forces destined for destruction such as the animal to be slaughtered should not be mixed with life-forces meant to remain alive. On the contrary, the very life-force to be sacrificed is to rehabilitate that of its owner through having been elevated to serve as an offering on G’d’s altar. 
    Maimonides, writing on reasons underlying the various commandments, (Moreh Nevuchim 3,46) says that the prohibition to eat blood aims at removing man from getting involved with demons. When the Israelites departed from Egypt they were experts in the discipline of demons, etc. They had picked up this knowledge from the Egyptians who were very much preoccupied with all kinds of such phenomena. Whenever the Egyptians felt the need to consult the demons they would dig a hole in the ground fill it with blood, something that would attract the demons. When the Egyptians wanted information about the future they would eat from that blood as they considered it demon-food, hoping to acquire demonic qualities through ingesting the kind of food eaten by the demons. This explains the verse in Leviticus 19,26 לא תאכלו על הדם, “do not eat over blood;” it is an injunction by the Torah against a practice by the Israelites at that time to eat in the presence of blood (Samuel I 14,33). King Saul upraided them saying: “here the people commit the sin of eating the animals they slaughtered in the presence of their blood.” [they did not eat the blood of the animals. Ed.] The Torah forbade the eating of blood as the Torah is always concerned with destroying foolish notions entertained by the pagans. When the Torah not only forbade the consumption of the blood but commanded that the whole negative influence on man by blood be reversed, it commanded as the means to do that that the blood be sprinkled on G’d’s altar and thus play a role in man’s rehabilitation from sin.
    Seeing that the matter of the demons [whom the Egyptians believed to be reincarnated in the bodies of goats, Ed.] was a form of idolatry, the Torah warned (verse 10) “I will set My face against any person consuming the blood and I will cut it off from its people.” The wording is almost identical to G’d’s warning of what would happen to people practicing the cult of Moloch (Leviticus 20,6). Thus far Maimonides in the Moreh.
    Nachmanides, in commenting on the above, writes that if these considerations were indeed the principal reason for the prohibition to eat blood, why did the Torah bother to write the word נפש every time the subject of blood is being discussed? This is the reason he wrote an explanation which is far more acceptable and applicable in our time as well. 
    The fact is that the wording in the text does not support the reasons offered by Nachmanides. Being aware of this, he wrote the other reasons which I quoted at the beginning of this verse.
    We need to add further comments on the verses dealing with the prohibition to eat blood, i.e. that once the Torah writes: כי נפש הבשר בדם היא,”for the life-force of the flesh is in its blood,” whereas on another occasion the Torah writes almost the opposite, i.e. כי נפש כל בשר דמו בנפשו הוא. From these two verses we can see that whereas it is true that the life-force נפש resides within the flesh, the reverse is true also, i.e. that the flesh, life-force, נפש and blood are as intertwined as is wine which has been diluted with water. The water and the wine are inextricably mixed with one another and cannot be separated anymore from one another. Nachmanides writes later (on verse 14) where the Torah says; “the blood of any flesh (creature) you shall not eat for the life-force (נפש) of any creature is its blood,” that this verse proves that the blood itself is the life-force (נפש) of any creature.” Once blood and flesh have become part of one organism they have become inseparable, i.e. one cannot survive without the other; it is like the substance and the form of a body. One without the other is meaningless. The blood which the Torah calls the נפש, the life-force, the essence, is that which courses through the arteries and veins, known in Talmudic terms as דם שותת, “blood which flows gently.”  Such blood, be it black (initially ) or red, does not burst forth in an arc but runs to the ground immediately below the point where it leaves the body. The next part of blood bursts forth in a קלוח, gushes forth. The last רביעית of the blood in the arteries is that which actually causes death.The first two categories of blood, though its loss need not be lethal, is called דם הנפש, “blood of the essence,” but it is not the life-force itself seeing that neither human nor beast dies as a result of losing that blood. The repetition of the word נפש several times teaches that the penalty of karet which applies to consumption of the last רביעית (measurement of approx. 150 grams) of blood does not only apply to that part of the blood but also to the previous דם קילוח and דם שותת.
    
    18,2. ואמרת אליהם אני ה' אלו-היכם, “and say to them: ‘I am the Lord your G’d.’” According to Nachmanides the plain meaning here is that the words ואמרת אליהם mean: “say to them in My name.”
    A Midrashic approach (Sifra Acharey 13,1-3):  “the words אני ה' אלו-היכם mean: “I am the Lord your G’d who has told you when you stood at Mount Sinai: ‘I am the Lord your G’d.’ At that time you accepted Me as G’d and all the authority which this implies. Now I am asking you to accept My decrees.”
    Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi said that it was quite clear to G’d that many years later (in the era of Ezra) the Israelites would have an urge to contravene this legislation totally and to intermarry with all kinds of partners forbidden to them under Torah law. This is why G’d introduced this legislation now as a Divine decree. By repeating His status as the Jewish people’s G’d and lawgiver, the Torah implies that just as G’d pays a reward to those who honour G’d’s laws, He will exact retribution from those who willfully flout this legislation.
    
    A kabbalistic approach: There is not a single word missing here. The Torah informs us that the attribute י-ה-ו-ה, i.e. the tetragram, known to the Israelites as their G’d refers to Himself as “אני” on occasion. Examples of this are found in Exodus 25,9 as well as in Exodus 16,26.
    
    18,5. אשר יעשה אותם האדם וחי בהם, “which man shall carry out and live by them.” These words refer to the משפטים, social laws, mentioned in this chapter. It is these laws which ensure that man can function in a civilised manner and maintain his position on earth as the dominant species. We have confirmation of this concept in Proverbs 29,4 where Solomon writes: “a king sustains the land by (social) justice.”
    A pertinent comment on the words וחי בהם “so that he may live by them,” is made in Yuma 85 where these words are interpreted as: “so that he will not die by them.” This is the origin of the ruling that the Torah’s laws are voided (at least temporarily) when performing  any particular one of them clearly leads to the death of the person about to perform them. (compare Maimonides Hilchot Yesodey HaTorah 5,1-3). There are only three command- ments violation of which is prohibited even if one has to give up one’s life in order not to violate them. They are: idolatry, immoral sexual relations such as incest, and murder. In all other instances the simple rule is to rather violate the commandment than be killed on account of observing it. However, this rule of violating the commandment rather than be killed on account of it applies only if the threat of death is in private. When one is required to violate a commandment of the Torah in public or be killed one must not violate the commandment in question however trivial a commandment it may appear to be and thereby desecrate the Holy Name of the Lord. This is quite clear from the Talmud Sanhedrin 74.
    A Midrashic approach (Sifra Acharey 9,10): the words וחי בהם, “so that he may live by them,” refer to eternal life in the hereafter. This is also the view of Onkelos who translates these words as: וייחי בהון חיי עלמא, “so that he will live an eternal life.” The different kinds (categories) of life available for body and soul respectively as a result of the performance of the Torah’s commandments are four in all. The word וחי promises the observant Jew participation in all these four kinds of life. The first type of life granted to those who keep the commandments is the quality of life in store for people who keep the commandments primarily for the reward promised. This type of מצוה-observance is known as “walking on the left,” seeing that the party concerned wants to take advantage of what is written in Proverbs 3,16 that the observance of Torah precepts if intended to result in long life is considered as “walking on the right,” whereas if it is intended to secure for the person performing them material wealth it is considered as “walking on the left.” The second category of מצוה-observance is that by people who intend to secure eternal life for themselves in the hereafter. Even though such people do not perform the commandments for their intrinsic value, i.e. לשמה, the souls of such people do have their wish granted. Concerning the two types of motivations underlying the מצוה-performance just mentioned, the prophet (Isaiah 57,15) has said that fulfillment of the commandments results in G’d “reviving the spirits of the lowly and  reviving the heart of the contrite.”
    The third type of motivation for performing the command-ments of the Torah is that by doing so one wants to express one’s feelings of love for the lawgiver, for the Lord, and one is not concerned at all with any benefit that will accrue to him in this world as a result of doing this. Such people will enjoy both long and happy lives in this world as well as their proper share in the hereafter. Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov are models of people who served the Lord out of love and not out of the desire to secure advantages for themselves by doing so. They translated their love for G’d into the way they performed the menial chores of life on earth, be it tending sheep and cattle, engaging in agriculture, or whatever.
    The fourth category of person observing G’d’s command- ments is a person who, in observing G’d’s commandments, does it in such a manner that he thereby negates the physical aspects of life on earth, concentrating all the while only on the trans- cendental values of life, on the celestial  regions. Such people are suitably rewarded in that death has no control over them at all. They return to G’d with their bodies intact as did Chanoch and the prophet Elijah ( compare Nachmanides on the subject  page 100 of his commentary Chavell edition).
    There are yet another four types of “life” man may merit as a result of מצוה-performance. One is regular life on earth such as the majority of people enjoy who experience no special disabilities in their lives on earth and are in good health. The second category of life on earth is that of people who have recovered from usually terminal sicknesses and near-fatal accidents. Such lives may be compared to vessels which have been reconstructed after having reached what could be considered as the end of their useful existence. We find a description of something like this in Job 33,25: “let his flesh be healthier than in his youth; let him return to his younger days.” The third kind of life is that granted by G’d to the sinner who was slated for death but has repented with the result that G’d grants him an extension of life. This is what the prophet Ezekiel 33,11 speaks of when he said: ”it is not My desire that the wicked shall die but that he turn back from his evil ways and live!” The fourth category of life is life after the resurrection. All of these four categories of life are part of the Torah’s promise וחי בהם that he who observes the commandments of the Torah may qualify for some or all of these lives.
    
    18,6. איש איש אל כל שאר בשרו לא תקרבו, “any man shall not approach his close relative (with a view to sexual relations).” This verse expresses the Torah’s prohibition of incest. According to Nachmanides the following verses describe the type of relations-through blood or through marriage- which are included in this prohibition. The biological reason for this prohibition is presumed to be that children born from such incestuous unions have a limited life expectancy and are generally genetically deficient in some way. Seeing that the whole purpose of sexual relations is the creation of healthy children, cohabitation with the various categories of family members mentioned in this chapter is forbidden. This is the meaning of the words (chapter 20,19) כי את שארו הערה, “for he has revealed his blood-relationship,” i.e. the prohibition is due to the deficiencies in such blood-relationship.
    Concerning the prohibition to have sexual intercourse with a woman while she is experiencing her monthly cycle, this  proves further that prohibitions of marital relations are rooted in considerations of health, the chance of a viable fetus being produced from such sexual unions. Seeing that the fetus is formed out of the blood of the woman either in the main or completely, reproduction of the human species from menstrual blood is scientifically not possible; the fetus would not even be started if cohabitation occurred during that period. 
    What would Nachmanides have to say in respect of Deut. 23,2 where the Torah permits [by implication, Ed.] the person who suffers from crushed testicles, i.e. is unable to sire children, to marry a female convert or a female Gentile slave who has been freed by her master (and has converted)? Surely if the dominating reason of the עריות legislation were rooted in biological consi- derations these people should not be permitted to cohabit with a Jewess, even one who was not a natural born Jewess! This proves that sexual intercourse not designed to produce Jewish offspring is not necessarily forbidden. I will explain this in context when we come to the relevant verses (Deut. 23,2). 
    The ראב’ד in his book בעלי הנפש chapter שער הקדושה, writes that sexual intercourse may be divided into five categories. Category one is a duty designed to ensure the survival of the human species. Category two is obligatory on the husband in order for him to fulfill his duty vis-a-vis his wife; this duty is called עונה in Exodus 21,10. Category three is when it serves therapeutic functions, is recommended for one’s health. Category four is when it serves to release carnal urges which preoccupy one’s thinking and may lead to sex with forbidden partners unless given an outlet. Category five, a forbidden category, is to indulge one’s lust as do the animals.
    Maimonides in the third part of his Moreh Nevuchim, chapter 49 writes that the reason for the עריות legislation is to reduce the frequency men indulge in cohabitation, to train people to accept that the sex act per se is considered revolting and that when it comes to the Torah’s prohibiting man’s pairing with the females of the species  mentioned in  our chapter, the common denominator found here is that the women in question are constantly part of his immediate environment and therefore represent a temptation due to their easy availability. Seeing that man is surrounded by such temptation, the Torah decreed harsh penalties against the violation of this legislation.
    Ibn Ezra in verse 6 cites similar reasons as governing this legislation. Nachmanides considers that this is a very inadequate reason for such legislation, and that to impose the karet penalty on a transgression merely because the opportunity to commit this transgression is close at hand is neither logical nor psycho-logically sound. Moreover, if mankind (as distinct from the Jewish people) was permitted to marry such relatives, i.e. Lot could have issue with his daughters (permitted), Yaakov could have many children from two sisters without visible genetic damage to any of them, the biological/genetic considerations could certainly not be the decisive reasons for this legislation. Moreover, Adam could not have found a more suitable marriage partner for his older son than one of his daughters, the sister of his son; it was such a pair who fulfilled the commandment that earth has to be populated by people as G’d did not create the earth for it to remain a wasteland (Isaiah 45,18).
    The fact remains that we have no valid tradition concerning the true reasons for this legislation and the choice of which relationships are objectionable. [why an uncle may marry a niece whereas an aunt may not marry a nephew (even if the nephew happens to be older than the aunt). Ed.]
    I will explain the reason for the legislation on my own account. (Rabbi Chavell traces this explanation to a well known Kabbalist, Rabbi Ezriel, quoted in the Sefer Hamitzvot of Rabbi Recanati) Relationships, i.e. kinship, are divided into three categories: The first category comprises kinship between people who had never been separated. The second category comprises new kinship between people between whom there never had been any genetic relationship before. The third category of kinship is that between people who are related by blood but have been separated at one stage or other in life.
    An example of the first category is Adam and his family; all of his descendants were allowed to intermarry freely, their union being considered like branches which unite with their common root. This is how we must understand the saying of our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 22,3) that when Adam and Chavah had their first marital union they joined on a bed and when they got off the bed there were seven human beings; Kayin and his female twin, Hevel and two female twins. The number seven symbolises the ”union” just as the Menorah (candlestick in the Tabernacle) had seven arms, all of them being part of the central shaft. Our sages say further that from a legal point of view Adam could have married his own daughter, however he performed an act of kindness toward his son Kayin giving him his daughter as a wife. This is the meaning of Psalms 89,3: “the world is built on loving kindness” (compare Sanhedrin 55). This kind of kinship where all the parties concerned had never been separated was not subject to the present legislation. Just as Adam and his wife were made of the same flesh, so their children were the product of genetically the very same material as their parents. No other genetic material was part of any of these children.
    The second category of human relationships is the exact opposite of the first. Two people who are of genetically totally different background are permitted to join together in marriage precisely because they are not related to one another. Such a union is comparable to the branch of a tree which had been totally cut off and is being planted in the earth again to produce a new root.
    Thirdly, the kinspeople who are too closely related to one another have been forbidden as potential marriage partners because they had at one time become separated. This is the group of people for whom this legislation has been written. Seeing these people were united generations back but had grown apart in the interval they cannot serve as a symbol of unity, something that marriage, building a family is all about
    To sum up: the rule is that people who are genetically distant from one another may unite in marriage in order to demonstrate that genetic distance from one another is no barrier to union, on the contrary the concept of unifying, creating a bond resulting in a union is best demonstrated by such people. People who are genetically very close must not enter marital unions (or sexual unions) because up until then they were symbols of the reverse of union, of separation. Seeing that the kinsmen and kinswomen were not the product of the kind of genetically unified unions such as Adam and Chavah, they do not display signs of such genetic uniformity.
    Seeing that branches should unite with their roots (if they did not remain united by not being lopped off), the Torah encourages marriage between such “stray, isolated” branches. The same is true of a solitary trunk. A trunk’s genetic excellence can be demonstrated only by means of its branches. If these branches had been cut off and scattered this is equivalent to the trunk (root) having lost its yichus, genealogical excellence. We may view people who violate the laws pertaining to עריות, forbidden sexual unions, as destroying the concept of creating unity. This is also the reason why the tetragram, the name of G’d emphasising His Unity, prefaced this legislation. This is why the words אני י-ה-ו-ה are appended at the end of verse two in our chapter. Our sages in Sanhedrin 57 interpreted the words איש איש in our verse as including members of the Gentile nations to whom such legislation (in part) also applies. We find other instances where the expression איש איש is also used to alert us to the fact that the law in question applies also to the Gentiles. A prominent example is Leviticus 24,15 where the prohibition of cursing the name of G’d is legislated. This is also one of the seven Noachide laws. Similarly, worshipping the Moloch and sacrificing one’s children to that deity is forbidden to the Gentiles. This prohibition is also introduced with he words איש איש, (compare Leviticus 20,2).
    
    18,7. ערות אביך וערות אמך לא תגלה, “the nakedness of your father and the nakedness of your mother you must not expose.” According to the plain meaning of the text, the verse speaks of a single negative commandment; the meaning is: “you must not reveal the nakedness of your mother for in so doing you would reveal the nakedness of your father.” Their nakedness is basically one. The same is true of verse 14 where the Torah writes “you must not expose the nakedness of your father’s brother; do not approach his wife she is your aunt.” Here too this is a prohibition aimed solely at the aunt as all the laws in this chapter are aimed at the females. The meaning is that in exposing the nakedness of your aunt you would be exposing your father’s brother’s nakedness.
    A Midrashic approach based on Sanhedrin 54: we are dealing with two separate laws (negative) in this verse. The expression ערות אביך refers to “your father’s wife” (as opposed to his genitals being exposed). The words ערות אמך refer to “your mother who is not the wife of your father.” As to the word ערות אשת אביך in verse 8, this refers to this prohibition applying even after the death of the father when the woman is no longer your father’s wife.
    The words ערות אחותך בת אביך in verse 9 refer to a half-sister not born of the same mother or the daughter of your mother who does not share the same father with you.
    The words מולדת בית או מולדת חוץ in that verse refer to the fact that no distinction is made if she is born out of wedlock or as a child of a legal marriage; in either event she is forbidden to you  being considered your sister. You have to respect her kinship to you though it may not be the result of a formalised relationship. As to the Torah repeating in verse 11 ערות בת אשת אביך מולדת אביך, this all belongs together with the line ערות אחותך בת אביך, “your sister who has not been born of the same mother as you.” The repetition simply means that violating this prohibition makes the party doing so guilty of having violated two separate commandments. Someone who has sexual intercourse with a half-sister from another mother becomes guilty of transgressing the injunction against relations with a sister as well as against the injunction not to expose the nakedness of one’s father’s wife’s legal daughter. 
    18,10. ערות בת בנך או בת בתך לא תגלה, “You must not expose the nakedness of your son’s daughter or you daughter’s daughter, etc.” Interestingly, the Torah failed to mention the prohibition of sexual relations with one’s daughter; the reason is that this may be arrived at by simple logic. If the Torah provides a harsh penalty for cohabiting with one’s granddaughter, the same is most certainly appropriate for a father who cohabits with his daughter. The absence of the direct prohibition of sleeping with one’s daughter is comparable to the direct prohibition of eating meat and milk. Seeing that the Torah forbade the boiling of meat in milk, (Exodus 23,19) it is clear that eating such a mixture is most certainly forbidden also.
    In connection with Exodus 23,19 I explained the reason why the Torah phrased that prohibition as applying to the boiling of the two  items of food instead of simply forbidding the consumption of the two at the same time. Seeing that the Torah failed to mention “do not uncover the nakedness of your daughter,” our sages (Yevamot 3) concentrated on a different method of deriving this prohibition by insisting that there is a written link to this legislation in the Torah called גזרה שוה, the use of otherwise redundant words which contribute little to our understanding where they appear. The words in question are זמה,זמה and הנה,הנה respectively (verse 17 and chapter 20,14 ). [the sages were not happy with relying on logic, i.e. a קל וחומר, seeing that such a source for a prohibition, while adequate, cannot be used to determine that the prohibition carries such a harsh penalty as karet. Ed.]
    
    18,18. ואשה אל אחותה לא תקח, “you must not marry a woman’s sister in addition to her.” The word לא תקח, normally applied to a legal union, i.e. marriage, in this instance means “do not sleep with her.” There are occasions when sexual union is described as ביאה whereas on other occasions it is described as שכיבה; on still other occasions it is referred to as ידיעה, whereas here it is phrased as קיחה. The reason that the Torah employs words other than קיחה to describe the same act is to ensure that we do not think that only a formal union such as by means of קידושין, a betrothal involving the bride receiving something of value has been forbidden whereas an informal union of two consenting parties is permitted. Seeing that a legal union with one’s wife’s sister while the former is alive is altogether impossible, the word לא תקח clearly does not describe what is impossible but what is possible, i.e. a sexual union without the benefit of marriage. Chapter 20,17 as well as chapter 20,14 where the Torah uses the word קיחה refers to sexual union without the benefit of a legal contract.
    18,20. ואל אשת עמיתך לא תתן שכבתך לזרע, “You shall not lie carnally with your neighbour’s wife in a manner which will impregnate her.” According to Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra sexual union can have either one of three objectives. One objective is to produce offspring; the second reason is to use it therapeutically;  to lower the body’s acidity, etc.; the third objective is to indulge one’s libido, i.e. to act like an animal. When the Torah here added the words: “in order to fertilise,” i.e. the most noble of the three objectives we have listed, it is to tell us that even when this is the objective the Torah absolutely forbids such an act.
    Nachmanides writes that the reason that the Torah saw fit to add the words לזרע is that without this word we might have thought hat even embracing and hugging someone’s wife results in the karet penalty. This conclusion would have been reasonable seeing that the whole chapter speaks of violations involving that penalty. Thus far Nachmanides.
    In other words, the verse tells us that sleeping with someone else’s wife results in the karet penalty. Naturally, when there are witnesses to the act and the party or parties have been warned they are liable to execution as we know from Leviticus 20,10 where the Torah decrees death by execution for both the male and the female partner in such an act of adultery.
    
    Solomon already castigated participants in adultery when he wrote -inspired by Holy Spirit- in Proverbs 6,27-29: “Can a man take fire to his bosom without burning his clothes? Can one walk on hot coals and not sear one’s feet? So is he who sleeps with his neighbour’s wife; whoever touches her will not go unpunished.” The reason that Solomon used two parables to make the same point  is to tell us that the guilty party will experience punishment after death by being consigned to purgatory whereas here on earth he will be executed for his sin. Furthermore, he may refer to a physical penalty for the man who touches his neighbour, i.e. a physical penalty, whereas he faces a penalty for his soul, i.e. being burned in purgatory. The body is compared to clothing, whereas the soul is compared to hot coals. Only the body is punished by being touched, the soul being “untouchable” in the physical sense. Solomon adds in verse 29 that such an adulterer will not go unpunished; he means that if the adultery had been consummated the guilty party will not escape punishment in purgatory. By the same token, his body will not go unpunished if he touched the woman. I have already explained earlier the mystical aspect of the union of wife and husband on Exodus 20,17, and will have further comments on this in connection with Numbers 5,17.
    
    18,21. ומזרעך לא תתן  להעביר למולך, “You shall not present any of your children to pass through for the Moloch;” There was a pagan cult called Moloch; part of the form of worship required was that the father make his son walk through two piles of wood set afire until he would be burned to death. The assumption underlying this cruel form of worship was that if he fire-god had been given one member of the family as a sacrifice the remaining members of that family would no longer be in any danger from that god. Not only that, but the surviving children would all grow up and be successful, aided by the power of that god. (compare our comments on Genesis 12,3). The reason the letter ל at the beginning of the word למולך has the patach vowel indicating that this is an already familiar phenomenon (definitive article), is because the Israelites were familiar with that deity from their many years in Egypt. The reason it was known by the name מולך, similar to מלך, “king,” is that it was identical with a deity worshipped by the Ammonites, (compare Kings I 11,17) also known as מלכום. This deity also appears with the name “Adramelech or Anamelech the god of the Sefaryam” (Kings II 17,31). The word “adar” means “honour,” the word “An” means עונה in Hebrew, “affliction, suffering.” Each of these words has the word מלך appended to it. One single cult was known by so many different names.
    According to Rabbeinu Chananel each of these names represents a different cult as he explains in his commentary on Parshat Ki Tissa. He writes: there are many different forms of idolatrous cults. Some consist of making the idol have the likeness of a human being or at least the face of a human being. Other cults worship a symbol resembling the appearance of a cherub, angel-like figure. Still others worship a force symbolised by the image of certain domestic beasts, free-roaming animals or birds. This is what we read in Kings II 17,30-31: “The Babylonians made Sukoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nirgal, and the men of Chamath made Ashima; and the Avvites made Nivchaz and Tartak; and the Sepharvides burned their children to Adramelech and Anamelech, the gods of the Sepharvaim.” All of these names are different gods. The expression Sukoth-benoth refers to a hen and her chicks; the name Nirgal refers to the male chicken, the rooster. The name Ashima describes a cat, whereas the name Nivchaz describes a dog. The name Tartak describes a donkey, Adramelech an ape, and Anamelech refers to the peacock.
    I believe that these idols were named after certain stars (patterns resembling such animals). This would correspond to Amos 5,26: “Sikkuth and Kiyyun of your astral deity, the images you have made for yourselves.” The words Sikkuth and Kiyyun are both names of stars and are what Jeremiah 44,19 refers to when he said: “and when we make offerings to the Queen of Heaven and pour libations to her.” The people referred to the stars as “Queen of Heaven.”
    The expression  “kiyyun tzalmeychem” in Amos 5,26 refers to Zachal, otherwise known as Shabbtai (Saturn). The word “kochav eloheychem” in the same verse refers to one of the seven fixed stars (planets)  i.e. the sun. Thus far Rabbeinu Chananel.
    The concept underlying these cults was that each of these stars, (planets) has the power to pull down from Heaven certain positive and beneficial outpourings of the Creator’s largesse. They called such a deity “kiyyun” on account of the type of food they prepared and served to the image representing the particular deity. [When you consider that the Torah directs that the Altar serves as the gateway to G’d and that the sacrifices presented there are described by G’d as לחם אלוהים “bread (food) for G’d,” the cult does not sound as childish as we are wont to think. The error committed by all the cult-worshippers is that the deities they serve are demonstrably unfree, bound to an orbit we can predict to a fraction of a second, i.e. obviously under a higher authority. Ed.] The word כונים in Jeremiah 44,19 describing the food presented to these deities is an Accadian word describing small cakes.
    Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra writes that the word נבחז should be spelled נבחן and is composed of the words נובח, “bellows,” and שן, “showing one’s teeth.” When the Torah in our verse uses the expression להעביר למולך, instead of writing להעביר באש, “to make them pass through fire,” this  is due to the fact that everyone at the time knew that the expression להעביר meant to “pass through fire.” There are numerous verses in the Bible confirming this, such as Deut. 18,10, Kings II 16,3; this is why the sages in Sanhedrin 64 had to tell us that the mother of King Chizkiyah had smeared him all over with the blood of a salamander to make him fire-resistant. We also have a verse in Ezekiel 23,37: “and they have even offered to them as food the children they bore to Me.” [worship of the Lord and simultaneous worship of the Moloch was particularly repugnant to G’d. Ed.]
    However, the traditional view of our sages of the wording in our verse not mentioning fire specifically is based on their making the father culpable for this transgression already before the child gets to the fire, i.e. at the beginning of the procedure, the one called העברה by the Torah. As soon as even a single one of its limbs is burned the father is guilty of death (Sanhedrin 64). The reason that this verse is appended to one dealing with adultery, something apparently totally unrelated, may be that G’d displays jealousy of the Jewish people serving such cults and thereby being unfaithful to Him, just as a husband is angry when his wife is unfaithful to him. This thought is spelled out in connection with idolatry already in the second of the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20,5) “for I the Lord your G’d am a jealous G’d.”
    
    18,26. ושמרתם אתם את חקותי, You shall observe My decrees, etc.” What is the need for the pronoun אתם in this verse, seeing it is already a suffix at the end of the word ושמרתם? It is meant to exclude idolaters (non Jews) from the restrictions of blood relations marrying each other. If a Gentile wants to adopt these laws as applying to himself (as part of his religion) this is not legally possible. Just as when the Torah said in Genesis that man has to toil for his livelihood in the sweat of his brow, not setting aside a Sabbath for the Noachides when such toil was forbidden and thereby releasing him from toiling on the Sabbath, (Sanhedrin 58), so Gentiles who point to the Bible as showing that these laws apply to them also are in error seeing the Torah emphasised this applicability to Jews only by the extra word אתם.
    
    18,28.. ולא תקיא הארץ אתכם, “so that the land will not vomit you, etc.” This verse belongs to the one following it reminding the Israelites that the former inhabitants had already been disgorged by this land. The Torah wishes to emphasise that the Israelites would not only be disgorged by the land if they failed to observe the laws of עריות, family purity, but they would be subject to the karet penalty in addition.
    
    18,29 ונכרתו הנפשות העושות את התועבות האלה, “and the persons committing these (abominations) will be cut off from their people.” The karet penalty appears in the Torah in three different guises. There is a karet penalty which is applicable only to the body of the guilty party. There is also a karet penalty which applies only to the soul; finally, there is a karet penalty which applies both to the body and the soul of the sinner in question.
    A karet penalty applied to the body only is recognisable by premature death of the guilty person. If someone has led a generally righteous life but has become guilty of a single sin punishable by the karet penalty he is condemned to die prematurely, living maybe only half the number of years allotted to him when he was born. An example of such a karet penalty is the student (young scholar in the Torah Academy) who had touched his wife during the days she had to observe the ritual waiting period before immersing herself in a ritual bath after she had stopped bleeding from her monthly cycle (Shabbat 13). This is called כרת של שנים, a karet penalty resulting in the loss of years; [seeing that the sin was committed inadvertently through ignorance and it is not recorded that merely touching one’s wife is subject to this terrible penalty even when committed knowingly, it is hard to understand that this should have been the only reason for the early demise of this young scholar. The scholar giving the widow this reason for her husband’s early death may have implied that G’d is especially strict with Torah scholars who ought to have been models of pious conduct. Ed.]
    There is also another variation of the karet penalty being applied to the body only when the sin was committed late in the life of the guilty party so that the karet penalty through cutting off many years of the life of the person could no longer be applied. An example illustrating this type of the karet penalty is recorded in Moed Katan 28. We are told that when Rav Yoseph reached his 60th birthday he threw a party inviting all his colleagues the scholars. He celebrated the fact that he now had proof that up until that point in his life he had not been found guilty of the aforementioned karet penalty. He was, however, still subject to the karet penalty known as כרת של ימים, i.e. not living out his allotted time although he had reached what is considered “old age.” Rav Yoseph consoled himself with having definitely escaped the full impact of the karet penalty. Some scholars hold that the karet penalty described as כרת של ימים refers to sudden death, not being able to make preparations for one’s death.
    Seeing that there is some confusion concerning the matter and the application of כרת של שנים, early death, is easily recognisable whereas the כרת של ימים is not, our sages expressed the view that G’d gives notice of this. If an old man dies after only three days of sickness this is a sign that he did not die of old age (the time which had been allocated to him being up) but died of that penalty. This is what the Jerusalem Talmud Bikkurim 2,1 had in mind when the rhetorical question was asked: “if an old man had eaten forbidden fat or had deliberately violated basic laws of the Sabbath how do we know that he was punished by the karet penalty for his sin?” The answer given by the Talmud is that if he died one day after being taken sick this reflects some kind of anger of G’d at that person. If he died after two days of sickness this reflects death due to a different degree of anger of G’d known as behalah. If he died after three days of sickness this indicates that he was guilty of the karet penalty we described as כרת של ימים. When the Torah writes the words ונכרת האיש ההוא מקרב עמו, “this man will be cut off from the midst of his people,” the type of karet penalty which is meant is that which applies only to the body of the person in question, be it obvious premature death or fairly sudden death at an advanced age (after 60). The soul of such a person will merit immediate transfer to the hereafter in the world of the souls and his resurrection at the time when this will take place is assured.
    The karet penalty which applies to the soul only applies to people who have sinned by violating very severe laws such as eating chametz on Passover, or eating on the Day of Atonement, or performing forbidden kind of work on that day. If he violated the עריות legislation in our chapter knowingly he is also subject to the karet penalty involving his soul. If the sum total of his sins was greater that his accumulated merits this penalty of karet is applied to his soul after it has been separated from his body. As a result he forfeits his share in the hereafter of the world of the disembodied souls. Concerning who is subject to such a karet penalty the Torah uses the formula ונכרתו הנפשות העושות, ונכרתה הנפש ההיא מעמיה, ונכרתה הנפש ההיא לפני, והאבדתי את הנפש ההיא, (such as here, or Leviticus 7,20; Leviticus 22,30; Leviticus 14,4 according to Sifra Emor 14,4). Although the last mentioned formula appears to speak of loss of physical life, it is possible that the Torah means that such a person does not experience premature physical death but destruction of his soul. After all, we find that many people guilty of deliberately flouting the laws of the Day of Atonement live to a ripe old age. Kohelet 7,15 already pointed out that some wicked people enjoy long life of undisturbed  peace and tranquillity on earth.
    Examples of karet manifest both in early death of the sinner and in loss of his hereafter apply to such sins as idolatry or sins equally serious such as blaspheming the name of the Lord (Numbers 15,30). People guilty of this will be removed from life on earth a well as from any life after death. Concerning which sins are subject to this harsh penalty the Torah writes הכרת תכרת הנפש ההיא עונה בה, “this person (soul) will most surely be cut off and will continue to bear its guilt” (Numbers 15,31). Our sages in Shevuot 13 stated that the word הכרת speaks of the destruction of the bodies of the guilty party whereas the word תכרת refers to destruction of his soul. We must understand the meaning of the word מעמיה, “from its people,” as applying to instances where only the karet of the soul is meant to mean that this soul after death will no longer be part of the Jewish souls who congregate together in the world of disembodied spirits awaiting the resurrection on earth. A soul subject to this penalty will be obliterated. In the words of Samuel II 14,4 לא ישא אלו-הים נפש, “Will not G’d  forgive a soul and make plans so that the outcast can find his way back?” [the author uses the wording to show that unless G’d devises a plan to save that soul from oblivion it will indeed be consigned to eternal destruction. Ed.] This is an example of what is meant by the wording: ונכרתה הנפש ההיא מלפני, “this soul will be cut off from My presence” (Leviticus 22,3). What we have written on the subject of karet thus far is the opinion of Ibn Ezra [Rabbi Chavell points out that our author ‘s interpretation of Ibn Ezra contradicts what the latter writes on Leviticus 24,30. Ed.]
    According to our author Maimonides shares the opinion he has outlined so far as is evident from what he wrote in Hilchot Teshuvah chapter 8. I quote: “the reward in store for the righteous is a life in the world of the future, a life that does not know death. The retribution which is visited upon the wicked is that they will not participate in that life but will be cut off and die. Anyone who does not participate in that life dies and is obliterated just like an animal which dies. This is the karet  of which the Torah said הכרת תכרת (Numbers 15,31). According to Shevuot 13 the word הכרת refers to death in this world, whereas the word תכרת refers to death of the souls of the people concerned. People who are subject to what is written in that verse will not experience any kind of life after death of their bodies.” Thus far Maimonides.
     We must question that seeing that purgatory, גהנם, was created specifically for sinners who had not repented, why should the people mentioned by Maimonides wind up without being aware that they have been punished for their sins? If the perfectly righteous are entitled to everlasting reward, why are not the absolutely wicked people sentenced to everlasting punishment? If the soul is totally obliterated there is obviously no way for such a sinner to experience retribution for his sins! If we were to say that the institution of gehinom was created only for the people whose lifestyle was what is called בינונים, i.e. that their accumulated merits and debits were in balance at the time they had died, it would follow that the totally wicked are better off than the people who have many merits to their credit! This is something that our intelligence cannot tolerate as being fair.
    Furthermore, assuming this was really the judgment administered to the wicked, i.e. obliteration of body and soul without suffering, why did the rabbis of the Mishnah in Sanhedrin 90 not enumerate the sinners subject to the karet penalty as one of the groups which forfeits life in the hereafter? 
    We must understand the words in that Mishnah: “these are the people who do not have a share in the hereafter,” as referring to an individual claim to a share in the hereafter over and above the share in the hereafter which every Jew has assigned to him (as a birthright) unless he forfeits it. The people mentioned in that Mishnah do not forfeit the various outpourings of tzedakah, loving kindness from G’d’s treasuries which are dispensed to people much as alms are distributed to the poor, not as compensation for services rendered but as a demonstration of G’d’s loving kindness for mankind. If someone does not have any money and depends on being invited for the Sabbath by a neighbour, he is considered as such a person who does not receive his livelihood from G’d in is own right but only through an intermediary. Similarly, if even the souls which descend to gehinom are understood to enjoy respite from their sufferings on Sabbaths and holidays (if only to bring home to these souls that they failed to appreciate the value of these days while they were on earth), these souls are in a situation similar to the poor man we have just described. Even the souls which will never be rehabilitated in gehinom are accorded this kind of respite on the days we just mentioned.
     As a result of such statements by our sages we must conclude that the concept of total obliteration of a purely spiritual soul is something that does not exist, in fact maybe inherently impossible due to the nature of such a soul. The correct interpretation of the words ונכרתה הנפש ההיא מעמיה, “this soul will be cut off from its people (Leviticus 7,20),” is that it is cut off permanently from the original place assigned to it, the place it had originated from in the “quarry” where all the souls emanate. Besides, how can we understand the karet penalty as involving the total destruction of a soul in light of the statement in the Talmud Rosh Hashanah 17 that these sinful souls are being judged in purgatory throughout the generations. Clearly the author of that statement refers to the continued existence of such souls, not their perdition. Such a continued existence would not make sense unless they had a future. Could there have been any group of people guilty of more fundamental sins than Korach and his co-conspirators who denied G’d and His prophet Moses, people who have been wiped out in this life and have not enjoyed the hereafter and yet they are suffering in gehinom, i.e. their souls continue to exist? In fact, they will be granted physical life at the time of the resurrection as we know from Sanhedrin 109 based on the verse Samuel I 2,6 מוריד שאול ויעל, “G’d who lowers to she-ol (gehinom) and raises up again.”
    The word מעמיה, “from its people,” means “from the other souls of its people.” Such a soul will remain separated from the people it has once belonged to. The very word ונכרתה, “to be cut off,” implies that the severing is one which is final, absolute. Just as a branch is lopped off the trunk which was its source of life, so this soul is severed from the people which used to sustain it by reason of its being part of it. In spite of all this the “solitary” soul will enjoy the radiance of the Shechinah in a place other than the one originally designated for it after it has completed its period of punishment. In other words, the word מעמיה limits the period of punishment, makes it less than absolute and eternal. The above is an opinion quoted by Nachmanides [according to Rabbi Chavell, seeing that the writings of Nachmanides on our verse do not bear this out at all. Ed.] Similarly, when the Torah speaks of “this soul will be cut off from My presence,” the reference is to the site where G’d’s Shechina usually resides. This would refer to the land of Israel, as that country is the gateway to heaven, the place from which the souls make their ascent. This is the reason that pious people are so anxious to die there and be buried there in order to facilitate the ascent of their souls.
    The prophet Jonah (1,10) made this clear when he tried to escape the presence of the Shechinah in the land of Israel; by chartering a boat to take him away from there so that the Lord would not communicate with him and give him detailed instructions as to what he was to say to the people of Nineveh. We have a tradition that as a rule, prophets do not receive communications from G’d while outside the land of Israel. [a major exception was Ezekiel, whose entire prophetic career was in Babylon. Ed.]
    When the Torah refers to persons who have been contaminated by ritual impurity through contact with a dead person and who enter holy precincts without the benefit of having undergone purification, the penalty is described as  ונכרתה הנפש ההיא מתוך הקהל, “this person (soul) will be cut off from the community (which practices the rules of ritual purity).” Seeing that the person described saw fit to separate himself from the community, his penalty is that G’d will separate his soul from the community in question. This does not mean, however, that another location will not be assigned to this soul after it has served the penalty decreed for it. The soul in question will not wind up like that of an animal just because that person neglected purification rites before entering sacred ground.
    Onkelos demonstrated his superior wisdom by refraining from translating the precise meaning of the karet penalty. Whenever it is mentioned he merely writes: וישתצי אנשא ההוא, “this man will be cut off” (compare 7,20 and 19,8, et al). The fact that in this instance Onkelos relates the penalty the Torah decrees to the body of the person by writing אנשא instead of נפש, appears to prove that he does not view the karet penalty as a wiping out of the soul.
    The philosophers think that the karet penalty is one that is aimed at the soul of the sinner, seeing that the soul is something preparatory, i.e. the instrument which enables the body of man to acquire any intelligence, etc. They bring ironclad proof for their contention by citing the fact that when man is first formed he has no vestige of intelligence. As he grows up physically his intelli- gence grows and his wisdom grows apace. All of this is proof that the soul is only a preparatory stage, a receptacle enabling the intelligence to be asssimilaed. If the soul itself were intellligent man should have demonstrated his intelligence from the day he is born, they say. It is well known that we do not consider the theories of the philosphers as binding on our outlook in life as their whole theories are based only on criteria which they can examine experimentally. We prefer to rely in matters like this on what we have been told by the prophets and our sages. They had traditions based on the true state of affairs [compare our translation on the author’s previous discourse on his subject pages 83-89 of our translation. Ed.]
    Our prophets and sages are all agreed that the soul enters our bodies in a perfect state, not something infantile that has to rely on biological growth and food. When the Torah reports that the creation of man was concluded with G’d blowing into man’s nostrils a נשמת חיים, a living soul, it is clear that since this soul came directly from the Creator that it was not something incomplete requiring the development of the body to give it value. Clearly, it, as distinct from the body, was something of an eternal nature. It originated in celestial regions, regions where the concept of death does not exist and is not operative.
    In view of the fact that the soul is something so infinitely superior to terrestrially created entities the expression ברא, “created,” (a term applicable to matters terrestrtrial) has not been mentioned in connection with it. The wisdom which the fetus was already equipped with while inside the mother’s womb became subject to loss of memory through the baby undergoing the traumatic experience of being born and leaving the secure environment in which it had existed up until that time.
    The Kabbalists compared  this soul to a light which has been lit and sbsequently extinguished at the moment the baby enters this imperfect world. This is the meaning of what the Talmud said (Niddah 30 and 36) that a fetus has a light above its head enabling it to see from one end of the world to the other end. Do not be incredulous when you read such words, as it is a fact that man can lie in one part of the earth and in his sleep he sees (in a dream) matters which occur thousands of miles away. The whole concept is documented by Job 29,2-3: “O that I were as in months gone by, in the days when G’d watched over me, when His lamp shone over my head.”
    A soon as the baby leaves the mother’s womb an angel strikes it on its mouth causing it to forget all (the Torah) it had learned while in the mother’s womb. This is a meaning of Genesis 4,7 לפתח חטאת רובץ, “at the entrance (of the mother’s womb) sin lies in wait.” We also have a Midrash which states that ‘they place a burning light on top of the fetus’ head enabling it to see from one end of the world to the other. The Midrash quotes the verse from Job 29,3 as its source. It continues that an angel guides the fetus to Gan Eden every morning and shows him all the righteous people who sit there and enjoy their existence wearing their respective crowns on their heads. The angel says to the fetus: ‘you should know who the people are that you observe seated there. All these people were created just like you in the wombs of their respective mothers and upon leaving their mother’s wombs they went on to lead a righteous life on earth, observing the Lord’s commandments. In recognition of this they now enjoy life in Gan Eden.” The angel continues to advise the infant that he too will eventually die and if he observes G’d’s commandments during his stay on earth he will merit to share in the life just shown to him in Gan Eden. Failing this, he would wind up in a different kind of place altogether. In the evenings, the same angel would show this infant what goes on in Gehinom. He would show him all the suffering experienced by the inmates of that place, pointing out that these people were being punished for violating G’d’s laws while they lived on earth. He would warn the infant to consider all this carefully when he would leave his mother’s womb so that he would lead the kind of life G’d wants him to lead in his own interest. When the time comes for the fetus to leave his mother’s womb he would forget all that he had seen before. As a result of forgetting such important information the infant cries at the time he enters this life, knowing that there was something important he should have remembered. Thus far the Midrash.
    What the Midrash makes plain is that while in the womb of his mother the infant is fully able to comprehend all that the angel shows to him, i.e. he has a fully developed intellect, otherwise what is the point of the angel showing him all this. The reason that G’d decrees for the infant to forget all he has learned while inside his mother’s womb is to ensure that when he does lead the right kind of life on earth he will merit the reward in store for people who do this of their own free will.
    Nachmanides on our verse writes as follows: when the Torah writes that the sinning soul will be subject to the karet penalty this is the Torah’s way of informing us that the souls of people who are not guilty of sins involving this penalty will survive the death of their bodies. It is simply not the manner of a king who legislated penalties against people who violate his rules not to reward those who observe the rules in an appropriate manner. The soul of man may be considered like a shining light supplied by G’d (Proverbs 20,27) which was breathed into him by the mouth of the Supreme G’d  personally as described in Genesis 2,7. The very fact that the soul as distinct from the body is not an “alloy” of four elements but is one single “component,” already predisposes it for eternal life as there are no possible imbalances between the constituent parts which could lead to its disintegrating such as the body. Just as the disembodied angels are creatures that endure indefinitely, the soul is a similar type of abstract intelligence intended to exist indefinitely. Keeping this thought in mind is why the Torah wrote in Numbers 15,31 עונה בה, “its sin remains with it,” i.e. seeing the soul does not perish, the sin  which has become part of it does not perish either. Or better still, the only cause of causing the soul to perish is the sin which cleaves to it. Seeing that there is no other way the soul can perish there was no need for the Torah to spell out that innocent souls enjoy life of infinite length. This is what the sages had in mind when they said that the words מקרב עמה, “from the midst of its people” (Numbers 15,30), mean that its people will enjoy peace. (compare Sifri Shelach 112). The very destruction of a sinful soul is proof that other souls live on indefinitely. This is why the Torah warns repeatedly about this penalty karet; it is something not “natural” but supernatural. When the Torah spells out assurances of certain rewards these are always in the nature of cause and effect, i.e. something “natural.” This is no different  when the fate of the soul is the subject. There was no need to tell us that souls survive the death of the body as it is no more than natural for things to return to their origin sooner or later. A body, i.e. dust, returns to its origin dust, whereas the soul returns to its origin in the celestial spheres. Solomon has already spelled this out in Kohelet 12,7 when he said that “dust (body) returns to earth whereas the spirit returns to G’d.”
    
    
    
   קדושים  תהיו
    
   תאוה נהיה תערב לנפש ותועבת כסילים סור מרע, “Desire realised is sweet for the soul; it is an abomination to the wicked to abandon evil.” (Proverbs 13,19). In this verse Solomon warns man not to give in to his various physical urges but to suppress them and to vanquish them. Anyone who succeeds in banishing his physical urges is considered on the spiritual level of an angel. Conversely, everyone who encourages his physical urges and wants to indulge them is on the spiritual level of an animal. When we take a look at the creatures created on the sixth day of creation we find that all the creatures created prior to man can be divided into two groups: 1) abstract intelligences; 2) creatures bound to earth by their bodies. The first group comprises the angels, creatures which are totally disembodied, divorced from anything material. The second group, such as the trees and other kinds of vegetation as well as living creatures are all composed of matter, totally devoid of intelligence. Each of the two categories of creatures performs the tasks allotted to them by their Creator, the former group using their intelligence, the latter using their instinct. Both these groups are not free agents but have to obey the instructions received from their Creator, using either their natural instincts or their G’d- given intelligence but neither being overtly interfered with.
    It follows that on the sixth day a third category of creature was created, one which represents a blend of the previous two. It was a creature which embodied both intelligence similar to the disembodied angels, and at the same time is made up of a body and responds to natural urges similar to the animals. This category of creatures was the human species. Man is not dominated either by the dictates of his intelligence or those of his natural urges. The principal difference between man and other creatures it that he possess willpower, i.e. decisions made by him are free-willed. If he is circumspect he can successfully overcome the natural urges he has in common with the animals. In that event he frees himself of the influence exerted upon him by the physical raw material he is made of. If he fails to resist the urges which result from his being made up of physical matter, he negates the influence of his intelligence, the element which makes him similar to the angels.
    As long as Adam did not sin and as a result became enmeshed in the urges common to animals he was a true angel of the Lord although possessed of a body. He was all intelligence, unblemished. As a result, he was fit to live forever (compare author’s comments on Genesis 2,17), similar to the angels who reside in the celestial regions. He had been placed in Gan Eden, the choicest location on earth.
    Seeing that he did sin, decided to respond to physical urges, he was deprived of the intelligence which had covered him like a garment and was dressed in earth-grown material. As a result he was expelled from Gan Eden and given herbs as food, similar to the animals. This is the meaning of Genesis 3,18: “you shall eat the herbs of the field.” Prior to that he had been eating fruit grown on trees, products of plantings by G’d’s own hand. Keeping in mind how Adam was demoted, or demoted himself, we must realise that it is to our advantage to break the hold that these natural urges have on us, something which if achieved is תערב לנפש, “will be sweet for the soul;” Solomon speaks of greed and similar instincts which, if they have been “broken,” conquered by man, are something sweet and pleasant for man’s intellectual faculties. The word נהיה in that verse, an unusual word, is similar in construction to Daniel 8,27 נהייתי ונחליתי, “I was broken up and ill;” we also have a similar word in Exodus 9,3 הנה יד ה' הויה, “here the Lord’s hand is about to break, etc.” Solomon urges man to break the hold these natural instincts have over him seeing that they are רע, evil. The Torah already told us that such urges are evil in Genesis 8,21 כי יצר לב האדם רע מנעוריו, “for the instinctive urges man’s heart is exposed to are evil, ever since his early years.” Seeing that the person who does break the prison walls represented by these urges is in effect סר מרע, distancing himself from evil, Solomon adds that תועבת כסילים סור מרע, that “abandoning evil is something abominable in the eyes of the fools.” Whatever is pleasant for the soul is by definition an abomination for the body, the home of these baser instincts of man.
    It is a well known fact that he who allows himself to follow these base instincts is thereby violating all of the Torah’s precepts. Following one’s instincts may be divided into four categories, four levels; 1) one does so theoretically, allowing himself to feel the urge and be titillated by it. 2) One speaks about these urges, a form of coming closer to giving in to them; 3) one indulges these urges by consuming the object of the temptation with one’s mouth, tasting it; 4) one abandons one’s entire body to the delights offered by such allure. As to fantasizing about sin Solomon already taught us  that such fantasies are culpable as if the sin had actually been committed in deed. (when it subsequently did. Ed.] In Proverbs 15,13 he told us that “a happy heart makes for a cheerful face, whereas a sad heart causes a despondent spirit.” Solomon did not want to tell us the obvious, rather he meant that there is a direct relationship between fantasizing about sin and translating the fantasy into practice. Just as the thoughts of the heart influence the body and its appearance, so sinful thoughts influence the organs with which these thoughts are carried out. The heart is to those organs what the root of a tree is to its branches. 
    The second category of following one’s instincts, i.e. speaking about such fantasies involves such sins as gossiping, character-assassination, using foul language. It is forbidden by Biblical decree. Solomon refers to it when he said that “the mouth of fools expresses folly” (Proverbs 15,2). Immediately following that verse he wrote that “the eyes of G’d are everywhere; they behold the good and the wicked.” What Solomon meant was that G’d pays close attention to the power of speech being abused as well as to those who use that power judiciously and constructively. G’d will punish the guilty. The prophet Isaiah also castigated people who abuse their mouths to speak foul words when he said: “(G’d) will not spare their youths...for all are ungodly  and wicked and every mouth speaks impiety” (Isaiah 9,16).
    The third category, i.e. eating forbidden things in response to one’s instincts, overriding G’d’s laws, is also a violation of a Biblical law. Concerning such lapses David said (Psalms 40,9) “Your teaching is in my entrails.” David congratulated himself that he never fell victim to the temptation to fill his entrails with forbidden food. David did not merely refer to food which was forbidden per se, but to gorging himself on permitted food, indulging his appetite instead of eating only in order to meet the requirements of his health. Solomon described a righteous person as someone who אוכל לשבוע נפשו, “eats in order to satisfy his soul (as opposed to his body)” Proverbs 13,25. In Proverbs 21,23 Solomon elaborates further saying that “he who guards his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from troubles.”
    The fourth category of temptation one may fall victim to is the one involving one’s entire body. It concerns indulging one’s carnal instincts indiscriminately. There is no need to dwell on the list of incestuous relations the Torah has already outlawed. The temptation to overindulge in sexual activity with a partner who is officially permitted is what one has to suppress, conquer. This concludes the four categories of temptations that the body is exposed to and which it is incumbent upon us to resist. Whence do we know that if someone allows himself to pursue these various pleasures available to the flesh that he thereby violated the entire Torah legislation? Solomon provided us with the answer to this question when he wrote (Proverbs 18,1) לתאוה יבקש נפרד, בכל תושיה יתגלע, “a man exclusively concerned with satisfying his desires separates himself from all wisdom (Torah).”  The word נפרד, “alone, abandoned,” used in that verse means that he who pursues physical gratification will find himself isolated, alone.  He will lose his friends and companions in the process as his friends will not want to expose themselves to these temptations. A person guilty of such pursuits is in effect “kicking” at the Torah. This is what is meant by the words בכל תושיה יתגלע. This is why the Torah asks us not only to refrain from what is forbidden but to refrain from and to suppress desires as these might ultimately lead us to violate what is forbidden outright. Considerations such as this led our sages (Yevamot 20) to formulate the slogan: קדש עצמך במותר לך, “sanctify yourself by refraining from that which is permitted to you!” Anyone who deliberately separates himself from such urges is described as “holy.” The Torah applies this flattering description to the Nazir who undertook to abstain from intoxicating drink (wine) and all grape-products as well as from contact with ritual impurity, and who lets his hair grow to show that he is doing this. The Torah (Numbers 6,5) writes concerning such a person: “holy shall he be, the growth of his hair on his head shall grow.” Just as such a Nazir is holy, the Israelites at Mount Sinai were holy as we know from Exodus 19,6: “and you shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, an holy nation.” The Israelites were commanded to be holy in order that they should separate themselves from the cravings of this world. 
    
    19,2. קדושים תהיו כי קדוש אני ה' אלו-היכם, “You shall be holy for I am holy, Hashem, your G’d.” According to the plain meaning of the text the word קדוש, means isolating oneself, being apart. This is an exhortation to the entire Jewish people to be chaste, to practices noble character traits and to impress one’s children with the importance of these virtues. Children then will look up to their parents as if the parents truly were G’d’s representatives on earth. In turn they will testify thereby that the Creator Himself is their supreme authority, the original “patriarch” who has called this world into existence. In order to make this point, our paragraph immediately commences by telling us that we must revere mother and father and observe G’d’s Sabbaths. (verse 3). The linkage of these two commandments is that the Sabbath is testimony to the fact that G’d created the universe (Exodus 20,11).
    The reason the Torah writes the commandment to revere mother and father, letting the mother precede the father in importance (as opposed to a similar commandment in the decalogue where the Torah writes: “honour your father and your mother”), is that it is natural for children to love the mother more than the father and to fear the authority of the father more than that of the mother. The Torah wants to ensure that we do not make such distinctions in our relationship with our respective father and mother. If both parents were to agree that the child is to violate the Sabbath, the Torah adds immediately: “and you shall observe My Sabbath days,” meaning that this commandment overrides even a joint command by father and mother to the contrary. The addition of the words: “I am the Lord your G’d” at the end of verse three means that G’d is the supreme authority for both the child and his parents and thus has overriding authority when there is a conflict involving the loyalties of the child. Both the parents and the child are obligated to carry out His instructions.
    The Torah appends the commandment not to serve any other deities nor to make molten images for oneself to make the point that even if one recognises the Lord as the supreme authority but denies that He created the world out of no pre-existing raw material one is considered an heretic, guilty of idolatry.
    One must not turn to idols as this implies that one considers that they are a substantive force. The words אל תפנו, “do not turn,” are not so much an instruction not to face the idols but that in one’s heart one must not believe that there is anything to them and to what they purport to represent. We must consider idols as something devoid of any theological meaning, totally powerless to exert influence of any kind on anybody. The use of the root פנה here is similar in meaning to Deut. 29,17: “whose heart turns away today from the Lord, etc.,” or Deut. 30,17 “if you will turn away and not listen.”
    The Torah adds that “you must not construct molten images for yourselves,” i.e. even though you are aware that such images are totally meaningless in theological terms, have no power or value. The reason the Torah appends the words: “I am the Lord your G’d,” means that ‘I can be trusted to pay you your reward, i.e. Hashem, (attribute of Mercy) but eloheychem, (attribute of Justice) in the event you do something for which you will deserve punishment.’
    
    It is also possible to explain the directive: “you shall be holy” at the beginning of our Parshah as applying to the sanctity of one’s thoughts, one’s intentions, similar to what the sages said (Shevuot 18) that when engaging in the act of marital relations with his wife both parties should harbour only pure thoughts, not wanting to merely indulge their libido. Seeing that such purity of thought at such a time has a genetic impact on the kind of children produced through the act of cohabitation, the Torah even referred to the children born as having been born “for Me” (compare Ezekiel 23,37: “and even their children which they had born to Me they passed before them the idols, -specifically the Moloch-that they may be consumed”). The prophet speaks of children conceived in holiness as children born to G’d. This is applicable to all the Israelites whose existence is dedicated to G’d. The reason this paragraph is addressed to כל עדת בני ישראל, “the entire community of the Children of Israel,” is because these laws apply to males and females equally. When Moses assembled the people and gave them the directive to build the Tabernacle and for the Israelites to donate materials for that project we also find the directive addressed to כל עדת בני ישראל, “the entire community of the Children of Israel” (Exodus 35,1). There too the directive was addressed directly to the males and the female members of the community. The reason for the formula איש אמו ואביו תיראו, is that there are three partners involved in bringing about the birth of a human being, G’d, father, and mother (Kidushin 30). The Torah mentions the mother first as it is a great achievement for the mother to attain the level of sanctity desired when she cohabits with her husband. The father, partner number two, is mentioned next as his contribution to the fetus is critical, i.e. his sperm is the most important ingredient. G’d is mentioned last as He contributes the soul, an essential component, (but only after husband and wife have already started the fetus). The words: “I am the Lord your G’d” at the end of the verse describe that G’d is the third party in the creation of the baby. The third partner, G’d, is alluded to in the words “and observe My Sabbaths,” seeing that amongst observant people cohabitation takes place primarily on Friday nights. The word תשמרו, is appropriately translated as “waiting.” We find the word שמר used in this sense in connection with Yaakov “waiting for something to occur” when told of a dream his son Joseph had which on the face of it defied interpretation (Genesis 37,11). Our sages in Berachot 3 use the word in a similar manner when they speak about שמר לי על הפתח, as the subject Elijah there waiting for Rabbi Yossi. The prophet Isaiah 56,4 speaks of the Lord having an encouraging message for the eunuchs and sterile men who observe the Sabbaths (although unable to sire children and hope for G’d’s partnership being manifest in the children they will father, resp. not father). The subject there are not people unable to produce viable sperm but people who deny themselves the opportunity of cohabiting with their wives except on Friday nights, thus observing the Sabbaths. Our sages interpret the words אשר פריו יתן בעתו, “someone (normally tree) who will give its fruit at its appropriate time” (Psalms 1,3) as an allusion to people who indulge in cohabitation with their wives only on Friday nights, thus observing the Sabbath in a special manner (compare Ketuvot 62). G’d rewards such people by granting them יד ושם טוב מבנים ובנות, “a memorial and name better that physical sons and daughters.” [this is the end of the verse in Isaiah 56,4 and ignores the literal promise of that verse which is understood as consoling people who have no children by suggesting that there are greater rewards than biological offspring. Ed.]
    There are those who claim that the reason the prophet singles out Sabbath observance by males who are unable (biologically) to have offspring is because the commandment to observe the Sabbath is linked by the Torah to future generations, i.e. applicable to the children and children’s children of a person (Exodus 32,16). As a result, a person who is aware that he would never have any children might balk at observing all the laws of the Sabbath and requires special encouragement. G’d therefore promises them a reward which is greater than their merely having physical offspring.
    The next verse in our paragraph exhorts us not to turn to idols, (verse 4). The connection with the previous verse is that it is forbidden to look at females (in order to arouse one’s libido). Our sages (claim that when one looks at females because they are females one places oneself in the same company as people who turn to idols, deities, even if they only admire the artistry involved in their construction (compare Zohar Kedoshim 84,1). Seeing that it is also forbidden to fantasize about someone else’s wife, the words: “do not make a molten image for yourselves” in the same verse complement  the thoughts we just mentioned.
    A Midrashic approach: The “be holy for I am holy,” with which our portion commences reflects the fact that the concept of a nation such as Israel inspired G’d to create the universe in the first place. Expressed differently: Israel shared G’d’s holiness already before the universe or the people were created. At this time G’d decided that the time had come for the people of Israel to demonstrate this latent holiness in actual visible fashion (compare Tanchuma Kedoshim 2). If we were to illustrate this concept in a parable the matter is similar to a king who has become engaged to a bride, i.e. she has become designated for him exclusively. This prompts the king to say: “seeing that I am the king and you are going to become my queen you ought to share my glory. Seeing that my glory is my title “king,” you ought to share this glory of mine.” Applied to G’d and Israel respectively, G’d’s glory being His being holy, He is now (immediately prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai) desirous of His fiancee the Jewish people sharing this holiness. The way to achieve this is to observe the laws of the Torah, plus. This is precisely what happened prior to the revelation at Mount Sinai when G’d told Moses to “sanctify” the people (Exodus 19,10), whereas G’d Himself sanctified the people when He said: “you will be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation” (Exodus 19,6).
    Rabbi Levi (Vayikra Rabbah 24,5) claimed that the entire Ten Commandments are recorded in this portion. Whereas in the decalogue we read אנכי ה' אלוקיך, “I am the Lord your G’d,” in our portion (19,4) we read אני ה' אלוקיכם. Whereas in the decalogue we are told לא יהיה לך אלוהים אחרים, “do not have any other gods and do not make yourselves a hewn image, etc.,” we are told here (verse 4) “do not make yourselves a molten image.” Whereas in the decalogue we are told not to utter the name of the Lord in vain, we are told here not to swear a false oath using the Lord’s name (verse 12). Whereas we are told in the Ten Command-ments to observe the Sabbath, we are told here to observe the Lord’s Sabbath days (verse 3). Whereas we are told in the decalogue to honour father and mother, we are told here to revere mother and father (verse 3). Whereas we are told in the Ten Commandments not to commit murder, we are told here “not to stand idly by when we see someone being murdered.” (19,16). In the Ten Commandments we are told not to commit adultery, whereas in our portion here we are being told: “do not desecrate your daughter to make her a harlot” (verse 29). The decalogue commands us not to steal, whereas here we are told: “do not steal” (19,11). In the decalogue the Torah warns against bearing false witness against someone, whereas in our portion we are warned: “do not commit character assassination, defamation” (19,16). In the decalogue we are exhorted not to covet other people’s possessions, especially his wife, whereas here the Torah commands us to: “love what is your neighbour’s just as what is yours,” i.e. not to covet what is his” (19,18). 
    19,4. אל תפנו אל האלילים “do not turn to the “non-deities.”  The verse speaks about disembodied spirits beneath the (domain) of the ten emanations; the reason they are called אלילים is that they do possess certain god-like powers. The reason the word is repeated, i.e. אלילים instead of אלים, is to remind the reader that whatever power is displayed by these disembodied spirits is not an independent power but merely something accorded to them by the Creator. They derive their power from another source. This fact prompted the psalmist to say in Psalms 96,5 כי כל אלוהי העמים אלילים וה' שמים עשה, “all the gods of the peoples are mere idols, but the Lord made the heavens.” The psalmist means that the supremacy of Hashem is clearly evident in that He created the Heaven (the entire universe) single-handedly.
   ואלהי מסכה, “and molten images, etc.” this refers to images of stars, zodiac signs, etc., which are below the level of these disembodied spirits just mentioned. These molten images are perceived as receiving their power from these stars, etc. The name אלוהי מסכה is appropriate and comparable to what the prophet Isaiah 40,19 described as הפסל נסך חרש, “the molten image is poured by the artisan.”
   אני ה' אלוקיכם, “I am the Lord your G’d.” “I exercise control over all levels of phenomena.” We have a similar thought expressed more unmistakably by Solomon in Kohelet 5,7 where he wrote: “for there is One higher than the high Who watches and there are high ones above them.”
    The words אל תפנו also include a concept described by David as בידך עתותי,  “in Your hand are my times.” (Psalms 31,16).  We read in Exodus 3,15 that G’d told Moses concerning hidden meaning in His name, זה שמי לעלם, “normally translated as: ‘this is My name forever.” The fact is that the word forever, לעולם is spelled defective in that verse, the letter ו being missing. This means that G’d has kept something concealed, hidden. Briefly, G’d’s message was that although the believers in the stars and zodiac signs attribute significance to the timing of any action in order to ensure that they will be successful, i.e. under the influence of the horoscope, Jews do not. This is what David had in mind when he spoke about his “fate” being in G’d’s hands, calling his fate עתותי, “what is meant to happen to me at any predetermined point in time.” He expresses his absolute trust in leaving such matters to G’d, not to consulting horoscopes. When G’d concludes our verse by writing אני ה', this is a reminder to the Jewish people that their fate at least is not subject to אלילים, and it would be not only wrong but foolhardy of them to turn to cheap imitations of the real Power in this world.
   לא תעשו לכם אני ה' אלוקיכם, ”do not construct for yourselves, I am the Lord your G’d.” These words are the conclusion of the three verses 2-3-4. We find a similar ending (signature) in 19,34 which concludes the subject of the treatment of strangers (converts). This type of signature is used again in verse 36 concluding the warning not to use false weights, etc., There are still a few other commandments which are signed by G’d saying: “I am the Lord your G’d.” (verses 10-25-31). The reason underlying these statements is that all the commandments originate with G’d, but that only performance of them testifies to the fact that G’d is the lawgiver. This is what the sages meant when they said that if someone spends his entire time only studying the Torah he is comparable to a person who does not have a personal G’d” (Avodah Zarah 17). Their meaning is very clear. We are to demonstrate the existence of G’d and His law by carrying it out in practice. If we do not leave a corner of our fields for the poor, or if we do not treat the convert as an equal, or if we do not ensure that our weights and measures are fair, how do we testify to the fact that G’d whom we believe in has formulated these laws and that we have accepted them? In order to make this point the Torah keeps repeating the “signature” אני ה' אלוקיכם, “I am the Lord your G’d, as if to say: “demonstrate that I am the Lord your G’d”
    19,5. וכי תזבחו זבח שלמים לה', “When you slaughter a peace-offering to the Lord, etc.” The Torah means that “when you have the need to perform sacrificial service to a higher power, do not sacrifice to these aforementioned disembodied spirits, etc., but address your peace-offerings exclusively to Hashem.” The word לה' includes that such sacrificial offerings should not be motivated by your desire to receive some kind of gift or reward in return. Your motivation must be לרצונכם, to express your innermost desire (to come closer to your G’d).
    The reason that in this instance the Torah writes the formula תזבחהו instead of תזבחו such as in Leviticus 22,29 when we have similar sounding legislation, is explained by our sages in Chulin 29. The absence of the letter ו in the parallel word in Parshat Emor is to teach us that that when a Priest slaughters a sacrificial animal, the same Priest must not slaughter the next sacrificial animal to be offered; neither must two Priests combine to slaughter one single sacrificial animal. In the case of slaughtering animals which are not sanctified and not intended for the altar but merely for private consumption such restrictions do not apply. This is why the word תזבחהו is spelled with the extra letter ה in our verse. [I do not understand why the author speaks about a missing letter ו, when in our editions of the Torah the difference between the two verses is the letter ה. Ed.] At any rate, the Talmud derives from the spelling here that if one slaughterer severed the heads of two animals at the same time, (i.e. in one stroke) both animals are considered as having been ritually slaughtered.]
    It is also possible to say, in accordance with a kabbalistic approach, that the addition of the two letters הו in our verse here in the word תזבחהו are a deliberate reminder of the last two letters in the tetragram, i.e. symbolising the two attributes Mercy and Justice. (compare author’s comments on Genesis 46,1). This is why there was a need here to add these two letters. It is similar to the same two letters being written in Exodus 2,6 where the Torah describes the reaction of Pharaoh’s daughter when she saw young Moses in the basket as ותראהו את הילד, instead of ותרא את הילד which is what could have been expected. In that instance our sages commented that the extra letters meant that the princess also saw a manifestation of the Lord’s presence, Shechinah, when she looked at the baby (compare Sotah 12). Seeing that the תודה offering which is the subject of the word תזבחו in Leviticus 22,29 was addressed to only one attribute, i.e. Hashem, there was no reason to append the letter ה in addition.
    
    19,6. ביום זבחכם יאכל, “on the day (and the morrow of the day) you slaughter it must be eaten.” The preferred method is to eat the meat of the offering on the actual day the animal has been slaughtered. On the second day it is permitted to eat it still, but it is not the Torah’s choice that the eating be spread over two days or not be commenced until the day after the slaughter. 
    When the Talmud in Zevachim 55 speaks of peace-offerings being permitted to be eaten on two days and one night, this means the day of the slaughter, the night following, and the following day. On the night following the second day the offering is already in the category of נותר, “left over,” and must not be eaten anymore, the remains to be burned. This is the meaning of the words: “and what remains of it on the third day must be burned by fire.” These words simply mean that the burning has to take place on the third day, not the eating.
    
    19,9. ובקצרכם, “When you reap the harvest, etc.” The reason the word ובקצרכם is in the plural is because the portion commenced with Israel being addressed in the plural, i.e. as the community. Moreover, it was the custom in those days that many people began the harvesting process simultaneously. By contrast the words
   לא תכלה, “do not completely harvest the corner, etc.” are in the singular seeing the warning is addressed to the individual owner of the field in question. We find that the Torah uses the singular in other parallel legislation where the onus is on the individual owner (compare verse 10). Our sages in Chulin 135 comment that seeing the Torah spoke about שדך, “the field belonging to you the individual,” I might have thought that fields owned jointly by two or more partners could escape the application of this legislation. To ensure that we do not draw such conclusions the Torah employs the plural in our verse here, speaking about a number of people harvesting.
    
    19,10. וכרמך לא תעולל, “and your vineyard you must not pick undeveloped fruit.” The Torah means that when you come across unripe single grapes during the process of harvesting the vineyard you must leave those for the stranger, the poor, etc. The reason these single unripe grapes are known as עוללות, a word usually describing babies, is that these grapes are to regular clusters of grapes as these babies in relation to fully grown men.  They must be left as gleanings for the poor.
   ופרט כרמך, “and the fallen fruit of your vineyard you shall not gather.” The individual ripe grapes which for one reason or another fall off the clusters are called פרט. Individual ears of corn are also known by that name once they have been separated from the stalk. Compare Yoel 1,17 עבשו פרדות תחת מגרפותיהם, “the seeds have shriveled under their clods.” When the prophet predicts desolation due to crop failure both of grain and fruit trees, he refers to the immediate cause being the shriveling up of these individual ears of corn used as seed. The word עבשו is similar to the word עפשו, “turned mouldy.” The word מגרפותיהם used by the prophet is derived from אגרף, “fist.” The prophet uses the comparison between the whole, the combined and the separate, the individual. He describes the whole stalk full of ears as similar to a “fistful,” whereas the individual ears of corn he describes as having shriveled, עבשו. The word פרט is always found in Talmudic Hebrew as the contrast to the כלל, the community, the all-inclusive rule, for instance. In Megillah 26 the Talmud speaks of האי תיבותא דארפט, “a holy ark in the Synagogue which is disintegrating,” and from the usable parts of which it is permitted to make a similar smaller ark, although not something to hold secular books or scrolls. The letters רט in the word in the Talmud, though inverted, do not change the meaning of the word, i.e. that it fell apart into its components which were previously held together. In connection with defining the word פרט more closely, our sages (Peyah 6,8) stated that if one or two grapes fell off a cluster the definition פרט applies, whereas if three or more grapes fell off together this definition does not longer apply and the grower may retrieve them. The same definition applies to individual stalks of corn as opposed to sheaves. 
    
    19,11.לא תגנובו , “you shall not steal!” At this point the Torah reverts to using the plural seeing that a similar commandment in the Ten Commandments had been addressed to the individual, i.e. לא תגנוב. The Torah did not want us to think that the commandment here was merely a repetition of what has already been written in the decalogue. In the decalogue the Torah speaks of someone stealing somebody for which the penalty is execution, whereas here the Torah speaks about objects or even animals for which financial compensation with or without a penalty is in place. The reason we know that in the decalogue we speak about a different category of theft, i.e. kidnapping, is that the other commandments there i.e. “do not commit adultery, and do not murder,” are also sins punishable by execution of the person violating them deliberately. Here the Torah speaks of stealing money, or the equivalent of money, something that can be expiated by means of payments to the party concerned. We were told in Baba Metzia 61 that the wording לא תגנובו implies that stealing is prohibited even  if one committed the theft only in order to annoy the person from whom one stole without the intention of keeping the stolen money. The reason the sages in Baba Metzia had to come up with this explanation is that seeing the Torah already wrote לא תגזול, “do not commit robbery,” and everyone who steals is automatically guilty of violating the commandment not to commit robbery, the words לא תגנובו had to contain an additional dimension. 
   לא תכחשו ולא תשקרו, ולא תשבעו בשמי לשקר, “do not deny falsely, do not lie, and do not use My name to swear a false oath.” The Torah, with its infinite psychological insight, describes a sequence of events. One starts by stealing, then denies that one has stolen, then denies it on oath. In the end one is guilty of desecrating the Lord’s name (when others hear about it). The Torah speaks particularly of invoking the tetragram in any oath. “Desecrating the name of the Lord your G’d,” means desecrating the One name from which all the attributes, כנוים, are derived. The first time this injunction appears was in the Ten Commandments where the Torah also mentioned שם ה' אלוקיך, “the name of the Lord your G’d” (Exodus 20,7). At the time the Torah had added that the sin of desecrating His name by using it in a false oath was so severe that He would never completely forgive such a person for that sin.
    
    19,14. לא תקלל חרש, “do not curse the deaf.”  The reason the Torah used the example of the deaf person in this verse was to teach you to apply logic. If the Torah forbids you to curse the deaf person who does not hear it and therefore does not feel angry or saddened by such treatment of him on your part, how much more so must we not curse someone whose faculties of hearing are not impaired. All of these directives are designed to improve a person’s basic character traits and to ensure that he will not become the victim of bad and addictive habits. The prohibition to curse the deaf is not based on the Torah’s consideration of the victim, rather it is for the protection of the person doing the cursing. The Torah does not want such a person even to mouth curses where these have no visible effect; otherwise, the same person, being already in the habit of uttering curses will do so where they do immediate harm. When one has trained oneself not to curse even the deaf, one will be doubly careful not to curse those who can hear. The example of not cursing the deaf is a precedent applying to any situations of a similar nature. The Torah chooses examples from real life; similarly the Torah exhorts not to put obstacles in the path of the blind because they are not able to identify of who tried to cause them harm. Unfortunately, people who do have the habit of taking advantage of the helpless tend to be guilty of such examples as mentioned by the Torah. The words: “you shall fear the Lord,” after the warning not to place obstacles in the path of those who cannot see is a reminder that G’d can see what you do. The use of the expression ויראת מאלו-היך occurs usually when the matter is left to your heart, i.e. there is no police restraining your behaviour. Similar comments were made by Solomon in Proverbs 24,12: “if you say: ‘we did not know anything about this,’ surely He who looks into the hearts will understand (the truth), the One who preserves your life will know; will He not repay everyone according to his deeds?” This is also the reminder of our sages in Avot 2,1: “know what is above you, a seeing eye, an ear that listens, and all your deeds are being recorded in a book.”
    
    19,15. בצדק תשפוט עמיתך, “with righteousness you shall judge your fellow.” The verse speaks about the fairness to be applied in the judicial process. Justice must not be perverted. He who applies fair rules thereby strengthens the throne of the Almighty. It is said of G’d’s throne that “righteousness and justice are the foundation of Your throne,” (Psalms 89,16); if someone perverts the judicial system he thereby undermines G’d’s throne. This is a demeaning of G’d’s glory. The Midrash Tehillim 82 phrases the thought in these words: “if the judge judges righteously the Shechinah will be with him;” we know this as David said in Psalms 82,1: “the Lord is present in a community of true judges.” If the judges fails to apply these standards the Shechinah withdraws. We have another verse in Psalms 12,6 confirming this where it is written: “due to the groans of the plundered poor and needy, I will now act, says the Lord,” and the Holy Spirit is reported as exclaiming  (Psalms 108,6) ”exalt Yourself over the heaven let Your glory be all over the earth!”.
    
    19,19. את חקותי תשמורו, “observe My statutes!” What are these “statutes” the Torah speaks of here? They are primarily such laws as: “you must not mate your animal into another species, and you shall not plant your field with mixed seed, and a garment of a mixture of wool and flax fibres shall not come upon you.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason for these prohibitions is that all the things G’d created be they living creatures or merely vegetable matter each have their own mazzal, or representative in the celestial regions; each species was created as such, a principle underlying the whole creative process, where again and again G’d speaks of their being למיניהם, “according to their species.” Anyone who mixes species contravenes the expressed wish of the Lord. It is as if he denied the fact that the universe and all there is in it was created by the directives of the Lord. It is tantamount to expressing the view that G’d did not know how to best exploit the potential of the species He created. Adding new species through grafting is like second-guessing G’d.
    The prohibition of using both a donkey and an ox to pull a ploughshare simultaneously is another law based on the same type of consideration. The farmers usually bring the team of animals which ploughed into the same stable thus leading them to mating with each other. If they were to produce offspring constituting a new species this would contravene G’d’s laws on maintaining the purity of the respective species.
    A Midrashic approach: based on Tanchuma Shelach 15: The words: “do not seed your field using a mixture of species of seed,” represents the verse ה' חפץ למען צדקו יגדיל תורה ויאדיר, “The Lord desires His (servant’s) vindication, that He may magnify and glorify (His) teaching” (Isaiah 42,21). This means that there is no major area of life which has not been regulated by the Torah’s issuing commandments in order for the Jewish people to earn the right to a brilliant future after death due to their having fulfilled all these commandments. Our lives have been regulated concerning ploughing, seeding, harvesting, weaving fibres and even wearing mixtures of clothing containing certain mixtures of fibres. We are not allowed to eat all kinds of animals, etc., etc. By observing all these laws we truly “blanket” all our activities so that they represent obedience to G’d’s commandments.
   ובגד כלאים שעטנז לא יעלה עליך, “and a garment that is a mixture of combined fibres shall not come upon you.”  According to a kabbalistic approach the legislation which is part of the group known as chukkim is an example of something not only related to matters physical, terrestrial, and this is why G’d speaks of חקות שמים, “laws of heaven” (Job 38,33). Statutes which are known as “laws of heaven” have been addressed only to the people of Israel. The psalmist speaks of: “His statutes and laws to Israel” (Psalms 147,19), and in psalm 81,4 he speaks of: “for it is a statute for Israel.” In other words, just as every species on earth has been assigned by G’d its specific function, so in the celestial regions too each category of angel, etc., has been assigned its specific function. These functions include insuring that terrestrial earth is supplied with the celestial input enabling it to function optimally. We know that the concept of peace and harmony is as important in the celestial spheres as it is on earth as we have been told in Job 28,2  that G’d makes peace in the heavenly regions as well as on earth. In other words, contrary to what we may think “peace” in the heavenly domains is not a given, something inviolate, but it may have to be restored from time to time having been fractured. When the beings in those heavenly regions each carry out their assigned tasks there is “peace.” In short, when these celestial forces stick to their assigned tasks, i.e. do not overlap with one another, all is well in heaven. Similarly, we on earth must refrain from mixing species that should not be mixed so as to maintain peace and harmony in the celestial regions. Anyone producing “bastard” species destroys the balance in the celestial regions also. 
    The meaning of the word כלאים is “restraining something, denying something.” It means restraining existing powers from exercising their functions. One verse which expresses this idea is the prayer לא תכלא רחמיך ממני, where David asks G’d: “do not withhold Your compassion from me” (Psalms 40,12). Another occasion when this word appears in that form is in Jeremiah 37,18: בית הכלא, “a house of detention,” a jail where one‘s movements are restricted. Anyone placed in such a jail is unable to pursue the functions assigned to him.
    By the same token the word חקים is derived also from חקיקה, “engraving,” i.e. making a visual image of abstract concepts.
    When someone mates two different species of animals, i.e. מין בשאינו מינו, or he plants two different species of plants closely together so that both feed upon each other this is equivalent to mixing two separate celestial forces together which each provide that species with the ability to reproduce, i.e. which instruct that species to reproduce itself. This is what is meant when the sages said (Bereshit Rabbah 10,7) “there is no herb on earth in the terrestrial universe which does not have a patron in the celestial spheres which encourages it to reproduce.” The Midrash bases this on Job 38,33: “do you know how the laws of heaven work, can you impose its authority on earth?” Seeing that the first two  human beings who were born on earth were of different species, (Kayin and Hevel), one being the result of the evil genes of the serpent, the other that of Adam’s divinely inspired spirit, and we are commanded to keep our distance from the spirit of impurity, mixing the species has been forbidden for us as we have learned the fatal consequences which this could have. Basically, mixing species is mating opposites. It does not take superior wisdom to realise that this is likely to have devastating consequences. Whoever makes a point of separating or keeping different species apart contributes to peace and harmony on earth. Conversely, he who joins opposites, i.e. different species drives peace and harmony further away from earth. The reason is also that by doing so, one causes friction in the celestial regions from where separate input to the different species on earth originated in order to promote the continued existence of these species.
   כלאים, mixing species, has been forbidden on three different levels: 1) different animals must not be mated with one another (regardless of whether biologically such mating could produce offspring). 2) plants must not be mixed (planting seed together or grafting branches on to tree trunks. 3) certain clothing, i.e. flax and sheep’s wool must not be woven together and worn, stitched together and worn or serve as sheets, pillows, etc. The reason that regardless of outcome animals must not be mated together is because animals mate much in the same way as humans. Plants must not be mixed together at the point of planting or grafting as the woman of the human species is compared to the field (i.e. it receives input of seed passively). The reason that the mixing of the two fibres flax (linen) with lamb’s wool is prohibited is  that Kayin offered flax as his offering to the Lord and Hevel offered sheep, i.e. wool. Seeing Kayin’s offering was rejected this was a hint that these two species were not fit to be mixed with one another. (compare Tanchuma Bereshit 9). The fact that Kayin murdered his brother is seen as a warning that they could not have been full brothers genetically speaking. Hence the Torah’s prohibition of mixing flax and wool is a warning that genetic incompatibility is fraught with extreme danger. Seeing that it is Israel’s task to be a holy nation we must not do anything which would undermine accomplishing our task. When the Torah chose the wording לא יעלה עליך, “it must not ascend on you,” as the way it describes the prohibition not to wear garments containing a mixture of wool and linen, this wording alludes to the spirit of impurity which the wearer is not to “put upon his person” when he wears such a garment. [the wording reflects that of the Zohar Kedoshim 86,2]
    This leaves us with the question why the Torah not only permitted but commanded the mixture of these two fibres when it ordered that the blue tzitit  (fringe) of the four strings of fringes be made of  wool even if the bulk of the garment it is attached to is made of linen (Yevamot 4). [The word תכלת does not only mean a certain shade of blue, it means wool dyed this shade of blue. Ed.] The garments of the priests contained mixtures of wool and linen as a matter of routine, especially the ones worn when they performed the service in the Tabernacle (Kilayim 9,1). In fact this is the mystical dimension of Solomon describing the ideal wife/mother weaving wool and linen in Proverbs 31,13. According to that mystical dimension, the words in that verse, i.e. “she seeks wool and flax, and works with her hands willingly,” reflect the mystique of the entire poem Solomon composed here about such a woman. When the entire orientation of a person is to fulfill the will of the Creator, as is the orientation of the eyshet chayil described by Solomon, then, and only then, joining these symbolically diverse characteristics is permitted or even commanded. It is the task of man to sublimate the “evil” influences in our universe, to place them directly into the service of the Lord. The eyshet chayil is so named because this is what she does. Performing service in the Tabernacle is designed to achieve optimal sanctity on earth, i.e. to sublimate impurity. The blue wool thread on the tzitit is the reminder of the task of each one of us to make earth such a place where all evil has been sublimated, has been rehabilitated. Whatever goes on in the 
terrestrial Temple on earth reflects what goes in its counterpart in the celestial spheres.
    
    19,20. בקרת תהיה, “there shall be an investigation.” The court has to investigate the matter and clarify the circumstances in order to prevent an execution of the participant or participants as would be the case in a clear case of adultery involving a fully fledged Jewess. In this instance, though her betrothal corresponded to Jewish norms, she is nonetheless not yet fully Jewish and as such her sin is not subject to the death penalty.
   כי לא חפשה, “for she had not been totally set free.” In other words, as long as this woman was not totally free her status was not yet that of a full wife to the Jew who married her. Whereas she was out of bounds to everyone else, she was not yet her husband’s either. This unusual status is also reflected in the choice of the word בקר by the Torah. “Morning” is the time when everything becomes quite clear. The word ערב, evening, is the opposite, a time when things become unclear, confused.
    Our sages (Keritot 11) interpret the words בקרת תהיה to mean תהא בקראי, “she (not he) will be subject to lashes;” had the Torah written בקרת תהיו the penalty of lashes would apply to both the male and the female partner in that incidence. One of the reasons is that the male has already become subject to a guilt-offering as the Torah writes in verse 22. This guilt-offering is referred to in Zevachim 54 as the אשם שפחה חרופה, “the guilt-offering on account of sleeping with a slave-woman who has been partially freed.” Seeing that the woman in question was not a partner to that sacrifice, she is subjected to 39 lashes. The word בקר, with the vowel pattern kametz, kametz, means bakar, cattle; the lashes administered are made of calf-hide. It is also possible that the letter ב in the word בקרת is used instead of the letter פ to hint that the status of the woman is one of הפקר, “she was ownerless, no one had authority over her, not her former master nor her not truly wedded husband.” This is why she does escape the death penalty. However, she is guilty of the penalty of lashes for her unchaste conduct. (the latter comment is that of Rabbi Saadyah  gaon.).
    
    19,23. שלש שנים יהיה לכם ערלים, “for three years it shall be forbidden to you (literally uncircumcised);” the expression ערלה describes something which is covered up. It is as if the fruit on these trees are covered up, i.e. have not been released to the owner by the Torah. They are out of bounds for any use, such as selling them.
    According to the plain meaning of the text the idea underlying this commandment is that we give glory to G’d by putting at G’d’s disposal  the first fruit which grows in our land and not to eat from it until we have brought all its fruit as an offering (symbolic) to the Lord (the fruit of the fourth year). It is well known that the ability of the tree to produce during the first three years after it has been planted is very limited, its yield very meagre. The fruit does not yet taste well and does not yet have much of a fragrance. As such it is not suitable as an “offering” to the Lord to whom we offer only our choicest. In fact, most trees do not even produce fruit until the fourth year as its potential has not been fully realised until he end of the third year. We find something similar reflected in the development of the human species. According to halachah, i.e. the view of the sages, a girl of under three years of age is incapable of becoming impregnated, so much so that if her hymen had been penetrated at an age of less than three years and a day, it will grow back and she remains a virgin to all intents and purposes (Niddah 44). A tree, until it is 24 hours into its fourth year is not considered as one whose fruit becomes holy as described in our portion. This is why we are not permitted to taste of any of the fruit of such trees until after the first day of its fourth year. Presentation of its fruit of that year in Jerusalem is similar to the treatment of the second tithe, something while sanctified yet permitted to the owner in the holy city of Jerusalem. Bringing the fruit to Jerusalem is considered as sanctifying it to the Lord, as the procedure is linked to praising the Lord.
    A further aspect worth mentioning, something which is known to botanists, to people familiar with agriculture. Fruit grown on a tree during the first three years of its existence is harmful to the human body as the tree has not yet enjoyed the warmth of the sun to an adequate degree and it still contains acidic juices absorbed by it roots from the earth. Until these forces of the earth have been counterbalanced by the heat in the air, they represent danger to the human species. It is similar to the fish which have no scales. Such fish contain an excess of the habitat of the fish in question and such excess of that element is apt to be harmful to the human body. [taken from the writings of Nachmanides who bases it on the writings of a well known Kabbalist by the name of Rabbi Ezra mentioned in the notes of Rabbi Chavell].
    A Midrashic approach: (based on Tanchuma 14 Kedoshim). The reason that the fruit of the tree is forbidden for the first three years is that we consider such fruit as in a class similar to babies who are unable to speak properly for the first three years of their lives, i.e. their intellect is not yet fully formed. In the fourth year, when such a child is introduced to Torah study by its father all the father’s fruit is sanctified (i.e. a child when it starts learning Torah suddenly is of sacred nature). The word הלולים לה' describes the praises of the father to the Lord who has granted him a son who has started to learn Torah. The words: “In the fifth year you may eat” (verse 25), describe the time when the child can study the written text of the Torah already, i.e. from then on the child will add new dimensions of Torah. This is the meaning of the words להוסיף לכם תבואתו, “so that it will increase its crop for you.” This verse served our sages who said that the child is to study מקרא, i.e. the written text of the Torah from the age of five, progressing to Mishnah at the age of ten, etc. (Avot end chapter 5) as the model for their pronouncement. Seeing that in this imperfect world a father begets a son, takes him to the Torah Academy, invests time and toils indefatigably teaching him Torah and sometimes the child dies (as a minor) because of sins committed by its father, the Torah here said to the father (allegorically speaking) “in this present world, seeing that the evil urge is to be found all over and you fall victim to his lure and you sin and your children die, know that there will be a better world in the future when I will remove the evil urge and you will beget children and live happily to see them attain their potential.” This is what Isaiah 65,23 had in mind when he said: “they shall not toil to no purpose; they shall not bear children for terror, but they shall be a people blessed by the Lord, and their offspring shall remain with them.”
    An intellectual/investigative approach: Heaven and Earth jointly are the cause that the trees produce their fruit. The two may be viewed as similar to the male and the female. Heaven is the active ingredient (factor), earth the passive. Isaiah 55,10 speaks of the rain or snow dropping from heaven and soaking the earth so that it becomes impregnated.” During the first three years the earth is not mature enough to make the fruit ripen whereas heaven is not agreeable to imbue it with the power to make the fruit ripen. As a result, anyone who eats of the fruit which has grown during the first three years is as if he neither had a share in heaven nor a share on earth, seeing that  he had eaten without permission from either earth or G’d. This is why the Torah prohibited the fruit during the first three years.
    Maimonides, in his Moreh Nevuchim 3,37, claims that in those days the pagans engaged in some hocus pocus at the times when trees were planted. They had some material which they threw at the new saplings which they believed would hasten such trees producing fruit sooner than was the custom in the rest of the world. In order to counter this the Torah ordered that fruit which matured during the first three years must not be eaten. This would deprive the people (Jews bent on economic advantage) practicing this form of pagan practice, as the ones perpetrating it would not benefit by it. Most trees produce fruit in the fourth year. The directive to eat the fruit of the fourth year in Jerusalem was to counter the practice of the pagans to eat the first fruit of their trees at sites dedicated to their deities. Negative influences exerted by various horoscopic forces cannot be neutralised except by performance of rites which are the reverse of those performed under the aegis of such horoscopic forces.
    A kabbalistic approach: The three years during which consumption of fruit during the first three years is forbidden correspond to the (three highest) emanations, כתר, חכמה, בינה. which are lumped together as one as we have no clear understanding of their workings. This concept corresponds to the period preceding creation of light, a period described in the Torah as tohu vavohu vachoshech, (Genesis 1,2) something which we also cannot fathom exactly with our minds. The fourth year of the tree yielding fruit corresponds to the emanation גבורה, (nowadays known as דין); this corresponds to what the Torah describes as “the spirit of G’d hovering over the expanse of the water,” {Genesis 1,3). This was a period not completely hidden from our ability to comprehend but also not completely revealed, made accessible to our faculties to comprehend.  As a result, the Torah demands some form of פדיון, “redemption,” i.e. a process by which that which is beyond our normal capacities is made accessible before we may treat such produce as completely secular, “natural.” The fifth year corresponds to the era commencing with the creation of light, the first part of our material world. As pointed out on earlier occasions the word אור, “light” appears five times in the Torah’s report about its creation. The fifth year of a fruit-bearing tree is compared to the era of world history ushered in with the creation of light. The Torah alludes to this by writing of the fifth year להוסיף לכם תבואתו, with the letter ה added at the end [instead of the letter ו as is the spelling in our versions of the Torah, the pronoun ו “its” referring to the masculine word עץ in verse 23. The author views the letter ה which we do not have and which would be a grammatical inconsistency as an allusion to the five times the word אור, “light,” appears at the beginning of Genesis. Ed.] In order to remind us of the relationship between the emanations and this legislation the Torah mentions the word ערלה three times in verse 23. In other words, each one of these three first years symbolises a different concept.
    
    19,26. לא תאכלו על הדם, “You shall not eat over the blood;” here too the Torah warns about Jews not indulging in pagan practices which were current at the time the Torah was given. People used to dig a hole and pour blood into it and the demons would congregate around such holes. While in the company of these demons they would consume their meal. Seeing that they fraternised with the demons the demons would reciprocate by revealing future events to the people eating there with them. This was a wide-spread practice amongst the Egyptians and the Israelites had learned from them until they too began to believe in the power of these demons and they would seek out their company. In order to wean the Israelites of such idolatrous practices the Torah forbade eating a meal in the presence of blood (which had not been covered up, buried or poured out).
    Our sages (Berachot 10) understand this verse as a warning not to eat breakfast before one has recited the morning prayer. They phrased it thus; “do not eat before you have prayed concerning your blood (guilt).” [i.e. have asked forgiveness for your sins. Ed.] They also used this verse to arrive at the ruling that capital offenses must not be judged except during the morning hours of the day (Sanhedrin 63). The judges were not allowed to try such cases after they had already filled their stomachs so as not to approach the accused’s fate in a smug manner. Seeing that they could not be expected to fast a whole day and not be affected by their hunger pains or a desire to prematurely conclude their deliberations in order to have a meal, the sages ruled that such trials must take place in the mornings. When the Torah decreed that we fast on the Day of Atonement this may also reflect that our lives are at stake on that day. If we had eaten already when commencing to pray we might not relate to the day with the appropriate gravity of mind that it deserves. We are more likely to repent sincerely and throw ourselves on G’d’s mercy when we have deprived ourselves of customary creature comforts such as food. If one is commanded to be careful to be in a fit state of mind when judging others, how much more so must one be in the right frame of mind when one’s own life hangs in the balance, such as on the Day of Atonement! This is what Solomon meant when he wrote (Proverbs 6,32) “he who causes his own life’s destruction will do it” (commit the aforementioned crime of adultery; i.e. sinning is like self-destruction). There was perhaps no need to stress this point when it concerns life and death decisions; but even when matters of monetary values are at stake they should be dealt with during the morning seeing we have a verse in Jeremiah 21,12: “render just verdicts morning by morning; rescue him who is robbed from him who defrauded him.” We have a saying: “he who ate and drank should not pronounce judgments or rulings on religious matters.” [Rabbi Chavell cites a Zohar Mishpatim 122 that “anyone who passed judgment after he ate and drank did not pass a true verdict.” Ed.]
    
    19,27. לא תקיפו פאת ראשכם, “do not round off the edge of your scalp, etc.” This is a warning not to shave the temple with a razor  whether in conjunction with the hair on the rest of the head or by themselves. If one shaves both temples one is liable for the penalty separately for each temple.
   ולא תשחית את פאת זקנך, “and do not destroy the edge of your beard.” According to the plain meaning of the text the reason is that the visible sign which G’d has given man to distinguish him from the females of the species should not be destroyed. By destroying one’s beard one commits an act of rebellion against what G’d had intended. Violating this commandment is in a similar class to violating the commandment not to mate different species. During the report of the creation the Torah stresses again and again that G’d created all the species each according to their respective species, i.e. there is to be no cross-breeding.
    Had the Torah written את זקנך, I would have thought that one is not liable for the penalty of 39 lashes unless one had destroyed one’s entire beard; seeing that the Torah writes את פאת זקנך, “the edge of your beard,” it is clear that even partial destruction of one’s beard makes one liable to the penalty.
    The beard has five edges which are subject to this prohibition. two are on the right side of the face, two on the left side of the face, and one below the mouth. The beard is considered as starting immediately below the ear. If someone shaved off all the five corners he would be liable to five times the penalty of 39 lashes. This is the reason the Torah wrote the word פאת, “an edge of,” to indicate that each edge is forbidden individually.
    A logical approach: all of man’s activities are related to the five senses with which he perceives things, and it is not appropriate for him to eliminate (totally fail to use) even one of these senses completely as this might prove fatal for him; therefore he should make judicious use of each of these senses, i.e. seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, and tasting. He must, however, be careful to employ these senses only for matters permitted for him to enjoy. The prohibition to destroy 5 edges of the beard are a symbolic reminder that one cannot do completely without even a single one of these five senses. Otherwise the result would be destruction of one’s body.
    It is permitted to perform beard-trimming with scissors or instruments other than a razor as some of the hair above the skin remains and the beard is not destroyed completely. (compare Makkot 21) 
    A kabbalistic approach: the reason that destruction of this hair is prohibited is that the letters of the Holy Name, tetragram, are concealed within the structure of the body; the respective letters י-ה-ו are featured as part of the מילה, the organ which is circumcised, the mouth, and the tongue. This is why (according to the view of Rabbi Yochanan in Nazir 59) anyone who shaves his pubic hair with a razor is guilty of the same transgression as someone who shaves the hair of the “upper” beard, i.e. the facial beard. According to our author there are textbooks on anthropology which claim that the supreme intelligence with which our body has been constructed by Divine design is manifest in the way the areas where hair sprouts freely (face and pubic area) are interrelated. It is interesting that people who are unable to beget children, are sterile, do not have pubic hair and do not grow a beard. There are tendons which originate in either area of the body where such hair grows. Women and eunuchs do not grow hair in these areas of the body as both do not possess the facility of generating male sperm. Neither of them have tendons which originate in those areas and which link these two areas of the body to each other. They are (for people who possess them) a symbol of unity, i.e. an allusion to G’d. Hence it is proper for men engaging in marital relations to sanctify themselves beforehand. This whole commandment is a warning that through improper use of these organs one is not to become guilty of “erasing” the  letters of the Holy Name which are part of one’s body (compare Shevuot 18).
    
    19,28. וכתבת קעקע, “nor a tatoo.” Rashi understands this to mean something engraved on one’s flesh (skin) in an indelible manner. The word would be related to תקוע, “firmly in place.” The procedure is that one “writes” with a needle beneath the skin. The area remains black forever. Our sages in Sifra Kedoshim 6,9 remark that seeing one might have thought that the mere writing on the skin would have been culpable, the Torah adds the word קעקע, to tell us that unless this writing is of such a permanent nature no penalty is incurred. At the same time, had the Torah written only the word קעקע I would have thought that the fact that an indelible mark had been made this would already have been a culpable offense, therefore the Torah had to write the words כתבת קעקע, “an indelible inscription performed with a needle-like instrument.” According to Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, as long as the writing did not include the tetragram one is not liable to the penalty for violating this commandment. He derives this rule from the ending of our verse, אני ה', meaning that unless the name of G’d was part of the inscription there is no penalty. The whole verse could be translated as: “do not inscribe My name on your flesh in an indelible manner.”
    
    19,30. את שבתותי תשמרו ומקדשי תיראו, “you are to observe My Sabbath days and you are to revere My Sanctuary.” According to the plain meaning of the text the verses which repeat the warnings to observe the Sabbath are similar to those that warn not to commit idolatry. The reason for this is that Sabbath observance is equivalent to not serving idols. By the same token, failure to observe the laws of the Sabbath is considered as sufficiently heretical to be equivalent to the practice of idolatry.
    A Midrashic approach: why did the Torah use different verbs when describing our relationship to the Sabbath on the one hand and to the Sanctuary on the other? We could have thought that the Torah wants us to be afraid of that which is holy, i.e. of the Sanctuary. To ensure we do not make this mistake the Torah wrote: “observe My Sabbath days,” i.e. we are not to be afraid of the Sanctuary but of who the Sanctuary belongs to, i.e. G’d. He who commanded us to observe the Sabbath is the One who commands us to relate with a feeling of awe and reverence to the Sanctuary seeing it is His. In the event I might think that this law applies only while the Sanctuary is actually standing, the Torah writes this law in the same breath as that of Sabbath observance. Just as the Sabbath is an eternal institution, so the commandment to relate with awe and reverence to the Sanctuary (i.e. its site) is not dependent on the actual building which serves as the Sanctuary.
    A further exegesis mentioned in Torat Kohanim (Sifra Kedoshim chapter 7, 7-8) is: “I could have thought that at a time when the Sanctuary is to be erected this commandment supersedes that of the Sabbath laws, therefore the Torah wrote “you must observe My Sabbath days“ (in the same verse).
    A kabbalistic approach: I have already explained the words את שבתתי תשמרו when they were first written in Exodus 31,13, as well as at the beginning of this paragraph in 19,3. At this point an additional exegesis is called for due to the Torah adding the words ואת מקדשי תיראו, “and revere My Sanctuary.” We have to remember that the first time the Sabbath observance is mentioned it refers to  the “great” Sabbath, i.e. the observance under the heading of זכור, “to remember,” i.e. an active Sabbath observance. The second time it refers to the מקדש, i.e. the passive observance by the כנסת ישראל, the concept of the Jewish people, the “bride” of the Sabbath. When that aspect of Sabbath observance by the כנסת ישראל is described the Torah employs the term שמר, i.e. את שבתתי תשמרו. Seeing that the passive aspect of the Sabbath observance is meant there obviously cannot be a question of the building of the Sanctuary (something active) taking place on the Sabbath.
    
    19,32. מפני שיבה תקום, “in the presence (arrival) of a biologically old person you shall rise.” This regulation applies even to an aged person who is totally uneducated, unaware of Torah laws and consequently often contravenes them. Onkelos translates the word לא תשם in Genesis 47,19 as לא תבור, “let it not become like a בור, “uncouth, uncultured.” In other words, he thinks that all biologically aged people deserve this measure of respect.
    The words והדרת פני זקן, “you shall honour the presence of a sage,” on the other hand, is a sign of much greater respect. Our sages understand the very word זקן as an acronym of the words זה שקנה חכמה, someone who has acquired wisdom. They base this interpretation on Proverbs 8,22: ה' קנני ראשית דרכו, “the Lord has acquired me (endowed me with wisdom) at the beginning of His way.” At any rate at this point the words of Onkelos suggest that he understands both the word שיבה and זקן as people possessed of varying degrees of wisdom due to their age, the former less than the latter. The former may be proficient only in the written Torah, the latter also in the oral Torah.
    
    19,35. לא תעשו עול במשפט, “Do not commit a perversion of justice.” This prohibition has already appeared in almost the identical words in 19,15 in connection with the poor who was not to be given preferential treatment. In that instance the “justice” referred to was in connection with social legislation which had been spelled out by the Torah (legislating nationally). Here the Torah writes a similar warning concerning internationally accepted  norms such as weights and measures. It is reminiscent of Exodus 15,25 “there He gave them statutes and social laws.” That legislation too preceded the giving of the Torah, i.e. laws designed to regulate the people’s life in the desert.
   במדה, “concerning measure.” This applies to division of the land in Eretz Yisrael (Baba Metzia 61). The Talmud there discusses brothers who share in their father’s inheritance and who have measured the tract of land of one brother in the winter using a rope which is wet because of the time of year. When measuring the tract of land for the second brother in the summer, they must not use the same rope as the sun would have shortened the length of that rope to the disadvantage of the second brother.
   במשקל, “concerning weights.” One must not dunk one’s weights in salt causing them to lose actual weight due to corrosion (compare Baba Metzia 61 and Baba Batra 89). Dunking the weights in salt would result in loss to the purchaser. There are variant readings which suggest that the weights become heavier; in that event this warning would be addressed to the purchaser and not to the seller.
   ובמשורה, “or volume measures.”  Our sages in Baba Batra 89 explain that the seller must not heat up the item (liquid) he is selling to give it an inflated measure by volume. As soon as the liquid cools down it will be found deficient in measure. According to Rashbam there  this may apply to the foam which forms on top of a heated liquid filling the measure deceptively. Therefore, the seller has to wait after he has filled the measuring device until the liquid in question has cooled before making sure that he has measured fairly. He needs to make good any shrinkage due to previous overheating.
    Another aspect of this law is that the seller must not pour at great speed into the measuring device as this too would create foam depleting the real amount of liquid given to the buyer. Air bubbles are not allowed to be counted as part of the liquid dispensed. According to our sages the measuring tube called משורה is used  to measure small quantities. If even when the loss to the purchaser in objective terms is minimal the Torah is concerned with such a loss, how much more will the Torah frown on someone dispensing in a similar manner into a large measuring container where the total loss to the purchaser is much greater! The reason the Torah mentioned משורה as an example was that one transgresses this law already at the time one heats the product in question even if no sale had been made as yet and one cannot be accused of trying to defraud a specific person, prospective purchaser. Even when the seller has not yet poured into his משורה, the fact that he heated the product he was going to sell makes him guilty of attempted fraud.
    Just as the sages said that one is guilty for possessing faulty weights from the time one has manufactured them, even if one has not used them, so one is guilty of tampering with the liquids to be sold even if no buyer is at hand. It recalls what Solomon said in Proverbs 20,9: ”who can say I have made my heart pure, I am free from sin ?” “False weights and false measures are both alike, an abomination to the Lord.” Just as man becomes culpable for evil intentions [if they were subsequently carried out, Ed.] even while he had not yet carried out the felony, so he will be held responsible for making false weights and measures. 
    Our sages said in connection with idolatry that a person is subject to the curse of G’d already at the time he fashions an idol even though he has not yet worshipped it (compare Avodah Zarah 52 and Deut. 27,15). In the case of idolatry culpability also commences with construction of the idol based on Deut. 9,21 where he Torah writes: ואת חטאתכם אשר עשיתם את העגל, “and your sin that you committed- the calf.”
    The Torah therefore wrote משורה, to let us know that if an amount as little as a פרוטה, a tiny coin, is affected by the inaccurate measuring device, the person involved is liable to punishment as soon as he heated the liquid involved. Rabbi Levi said in Baba Batra 88 that penalties applied to people cheating with weights and measures are more severe than those applied to people guilty of sexual offenses, seeing that such people can repent their sins as long as no mamzer, “bastard,” has been born out of such a union [at which time the sin becomes irreversible, Ed.] Seeing that the practice of unfair weights and measures is indiscriminate in its application, the guilty party does not know whom he has cheated and he therefore cannot make restitution. Repentance without restitution is no proper repentance.
    
    20,2. אשר יתן מזרעו למולך יומת עם הארץ ירגמוהו באבן, “who gives of his seed to the Moloch, shall be executed, the people of the land shall pelt him with stones.” The Talmud Sanhedrin 64 sees in the word מזרעו as opposed to כל זרעו, “of his seed,” instead of “all his seed,” a restrictive clause, i.e. that if a father gives all his children to this god he is not liable to execution at the hands of man. This does not mean that he goes free, on the contrary, if he is executed for giving some of his children to that god his execution is his expiation provided he accepts the judgment and repents. When he has given all his children to that god he is not afforded the opportunity of atonement until after he dies and is consigned to gehinom, purgatory.
    A person who has reached the depth of deprivation by consigning all his children to the fire-god Moloch is not entitled to execution as a means of cleansing himself of his sin. Seeing that he does not have available to him such a method of expiating for his sin he will carry his sin to the grave with him and will remain guilty forever. 
    [Rabbi Moshe ben Rabbi Yaakov Mikutzi, in his Sefer Mitzvot Gedolot on negative commandment 40 writes in a similar vein. The author of that work preceded our author by close to a century. Ed.] The guilt of such a person is so deeply engraved in his soul that it parallels the examples of which the Torah had written הכרת תכרת הנפש ההיא עונה בה, “this soul shall be cut off again and again, it will continue to bear its guilt” (Numbers 15,31).The reason the Torah writes מות יומת, which sounds like a repetition, is that in the first instance it is up to the court to execute such an individual. Should circumstances be such that the court lacks the power to carry out the death penalty, the common people are encouraged to do this on their own. In the two scenarios just mentioned the situation was judicially clear-cut, i.e. there had been valid witnesses and the culprit had been properly cautioned before committing the deed. 
    In the event that there were legal snags which made a conviction of such a person impossible, the Torah writes in verse 3 “and I (G’d) will set My face against such a man and will exterminate him from amongst his people.” This refers to such situations as the deed being committed in secret when no witnesses were present at all, or a situation where the deed had been witnessed but the people do not care and do not testify against such a person. This may be due to their fear of revenge by family members of the guilty person or to other considerations. G’d means that He will not only intervene against the actively guilty party who “murdered” his children under the guise of a religious ceremony, but also against the silent onlookers who agreed with this cult. To make this wider application of G’d’s retributive arm clear, the Torah repeats in verse 5 that “I will set My face against such a man and his family and I will exterminate him  and all those who stray after him.”
    Maimonides, in his Moreh Nevuchim section three chapter 37 concerning the practice of the Moloch-cult, writes as follows: the fire-worshippers in those days engaged in all kinds of endeavours to strengthen the hold their religion exerted on its followers by claiming that people who refrained from offering their sons or daughters as potential sacrifices to that god would see their children die. There is no question that the fathers who worshipped that cult were not motivated by cruelty but by the utmost concern for their other children. They hoped to satisfy their god with a token offering so that the remainder of their children would not only not be harmed but would be blessed by that deity. They encouraged the child to run the gauntlet of the fire hoping the child would escape unharmed. The cult was performed with very young children, children under the constant supervision of their mothers. Seeing that women are easily influenced by horror tales, these women were ready victims of all these kinds of threats and warnings if they did not allow at least one of their children to pass between the two fires dedicated to the Moloch. Keeping this in mind, the Torah addressed itself to this particular form of idolatry more than to any others knowing how vulnerable the mothers of children are to tales of horror concerning the retributive powers of that deity. To demonstrate the extreme concern of the Torah with this cult the Torah wrote the additional words למען טמא את מקדשי ולחלל את שם קדשי, “in order to defile My Sanctuary and to dese- crate My holy Name” (verse 3). The Torah tells us that he who worships that cult hoping to sacrifice only one of his children will have all his children destroyed by G’d as a result. This is what is meant by verse 5. G’d’s retribution always fits the crime. Thus far Maimonides. I had written on 18,21 that some commentators believed that the “passing through fire” mentioned resulted in the child in question being burned to death as the child would be made to pass between the flames repeatedly. Maimonides did not understand the procedure in that way. He thought that the chances of the child being burned to death during the procedure were remote. If he is correct then the words of Deut. 13,31 which clearly speak of parents burning their children must refer to a different cult.
    
    20,3. ואני אתן את פני באיש ההוא, “and I will set My face against that man.”  Nachmanides points out that this is the only time in the entire Torah that the attribute אני for G’d appears in connection with the karet penalty. The reason is that G’d feels that by following this abominable cult the sinner has defiled the great Name and thereby defiled the entire concept of כנסת ישראל, what the Jewish people symbolise.
    Our sages in Berachot 35 have compared someone enjoying the fruits of this world without first reciting a benediction giving thanks to G’d for the availability of such fruit as stealing from G’d. They based this on Proverbs 28,24: ”whoever robs his father and mother and says: ‘it is no sin,’ is a companion of a destroyer.” The “father” Solomon speaks of may be understood as our father in heaven. The “mother” Solomon refers to is the כנסת ישראל, the  spiritual concept of the Jewish people. We have seen the prophet Isaiah 50,1 use that simile for the Jewish people when he said: “ובפשעכם שלחה אמכם, “on account of your sins your mother was dismissed.” The words “companion to the destroyer” refer to King Jerobam who caused Israel to become corrupted to their father in heaven. If Jerobam who merely blocked the way to Jerusalem is described in such terms how much more so must a father who offers his children (fruit of his loins) as a sacrifice to the Moloch cause estrangement between G’d and His people! Thus far Maimonides. In the course of his remarks Maimonides explained to us that in most instances when the Torah mentions the name of אני it refers to the attribute of Justice, wheras in this instance it represents the attribute of Mercy because it is written in connection with the word פני, “My face.” We find a similar example of the word אני as the attribute of Mercy in Genesis 6,17 as there too it is written in connection with the word לפני in verse 13; a similar construction occurs in Exodus 6,5 where the name אני evidently refers to the attribute of Mercy. It is clear there from the context that the word אני does not refer to the attribute of Justice. [When G’d said there that He had heard the pleas of the Israelites this is equivalent to saying that their pleas had come לפני, “before Me.” Ed.]
    
    20,10. ואיש אשר ינאף את אשת רעהו, “and the man who engages in an adulterous relationship with the wife of his fellow, etc.” our sages see in the word איש an exclusion of the death penalty for a minor between the ages of nine and thirteen who sleeps with the wife of a fellow Jew. In the words אשת רעהו they see an exclusion of the death penalty for someone who sleeps with the wife of a Gentile (compare Sanhedrin 52). The words אשת איש indicate that sleeping with the wife of a minor is also not subject to the death penalty. Our verse proves that a marriage ceremony entered into with a Gentile is not considered a legal marriage.
    
    20,15. ואת הבהמה תהרגו, “and the beast you shall kill.” Rashi, following our sages, asks the rhetorical question why the animal should be killed seeing it had not committed a crime? The answer given is that seeing the animal was the catalyst leading to the sin by the human being involved in the act the Torah decreed that it be stoned to death. You may apply some logic here. If even an animal which is unable to distinguish between right and wrong is executed, how much more so will execution be the penalty for a human being who does know right from wrong. When a human being is the cause of a fellow human committing a sin, he is certainly culpable for what he did.
    We have a verse in Deut. 12,2 where the Torah commands us to destroy all the sites on which idolatry was performed by the Canaanites prior to the Israelites  coming to the Holy Land. This provides us with a similar reason of why humans guilty of idolatry will be subject to the death penalty. If even trees, which most certainly were totally passive and had no knowledge of something sinful being performed involving them, are subject to destruction on account of this, how much more so are human beings who were the cause of another human being induced to worship idols through deceiving such a person, subject to execution for their deeds?
    
    20,17. ואיש אשר יקח את אחותו ..חסד הוא, “if a man takes his sister from his father’s side or from his mother’s side as a wife,.....it is a disgrace (or kindness).” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah here describes sexual intercourse as קיחה i.e. an act of acquisition such as marriage. The reason is that when a man marries a woman he does so with the implied understanding that he will sleep with her. We have found the word יקח used in that sense in verse 14 where clearly the whole concept of someone “marrying” his mother-in-law in addition to his wife is ludicrous. The same applies to the verse which speaks of someone “marrying” the wife of his brother (verse 21), technically an obvious impossibility. Clearly, in each of these verses the word יקח is used as a euphemism for having sexual intercourse with the second party mentioned in each of these verses. The reason the Torah describes such an act as חסד, is based on Proverbs 25,10: פן יחסדך שומע, “lest the one who hears it puts you to shame.” Onkelos translates the word here as קלנא, “shame, disgrace.”
    Nachmanides does not want to translate the word חסד as different from most instances when it appears and when it means “an act of loving kindness.” He considers the basic meaning of the word as either an act of kindness beyond the call of duty, or the very reverse, an act of unheard of debauchery.  He feels that the Torah chose this word to emphasise that compared to other forbidden sexual unions this is the worst, the most disgraceful.
    A Midrashic approach (Sifra Kedoshim 11,11) the words חסד הוא refer to the time when one had to marry a sister as no one else was around. Kayin is given credit for marrying his sister (three girls were born at the time Kayin and Hevel were born). The word refers to a true kindness as we know from Psalms 89,3 where Eytan (Avraham) says  כי אמרתי עולם חסד יבנה, “for I said the universe was constructed on loving kindness.” According to tradition the extra twin was intended for Adam, but he generously waived his claim and allowed Kayin to marry her. Had Adam’s daughter not been assigned a husband the world would not have become populated.
    
    20,21. ואיש אשר יקח את אשת אחיו נדה היא, “when a man takes his brother’s wife it is loathsome, etc.” The Torah does not mean to use the term נדה here in the sense that such a woman is considered like a menstruous woman  to her brother-in-law; the term is used in the same sense as the expression זמה היא, “it is sexual depravity.” The meaning is similar to the meaning of the word חסד in verse 17, i.e. it is despicable. Our sages in Yevamot 54 derive an halachic rule from this expression, i.e. that even inserting his member in the vagina without ejaculation is culpable. The reason the sages say this is because the Torah specifically mentioned this form of penetration in connection with a menstruous woman in verse 18.
    A Midrashic approach (Yevamot 54): the words נדה היא, “she is menstruous,” mean that there is a common denominator between marrying a sister-in-law and sleeping with a menstruous woman.  Both categories of women are not absolutely forbidden; the menstruous woman becomes permitted after ritual immersion, and the sister-in law is permitted if her sister who was married to her brother-in-law first has died. All the forbidden sexual unions mentioned in this portion have already been mentioned in the previous portion; in Acharey Mot the penalties for violating these laws were not mentioned at all; this is why here the Torah lists the penalties associated with violation of these laws. The only forbidden union not repeated here is that of someone marrying two sisters while both are alive. The Torah omitted this here out of deference to Yaakov who had married two sisters (before the Torah had been given and not in the land of Israel).
    The meaning of the word ערירים ימותו in verse 20 is that if these people had children prior to committing the offense listed these children would die during the lifetime of the father; if the father did not have any children at that point in his life he would remain childless for the rest of his natural life.
    
    20,24. ואני אתננה לכם, “and I shall give it to you.” With these three words G’d the Unique promises to give the land which is unique to the people who are unique, to Israel. This is the meaning of the words: “and I shall give it to you as a possession.” G’d means that up until that time the land of Canaan had remained His land just as the Jewish people had been special to G’d. He had never assigned any horoscopic constellation to govern the fate of the Jewish people. Neither had G’d appointed a special agent such as a מלאך or שרף to be in charge of the fortunes of the Jewish people. The reason is that “you are part of My share, not their share, I am your national G’d, not theirs.” To the other nations,-says G’d- I am only the supreme G’d, i.e. אלוהי האלוהים.This is how Nachmanides explains the above words. Even though this is not the precise wording of the verse it is its meaning.
    
    20,26. ואבדיל אתכם מן העמים להיות לי, “I have separated you from the peoples to be Mine.” The wisdom of the Torah which we have absorbed forces us to be separate and different in our food, our drink, our clothing, etc. Seeing that we are singled out to have been given the commandments of the Torah the nations of the universe are jealous of us; being jealous of us they have come to hate us. This is basically what our sages had in mind in Shabbat 89 when they said: “the mountain of Sinai used to be known as Mount Chorev. Why then is it known nowadays as Mount Sinai? It is because the hatred against idolatry and people practicing it was radiated from that mountain.”
    A Midrashic approach (Sifra Kedoshim 9,11) The words: “I have separated you from the peoples, etc.,” are to be understood as follows ‘if you keep yourselves apart from the other nations then you will be Mine;’ if not, you will become the property of such kings as Nevuchadnezzar and his colleagues
    Rabbi Eliezer son of Azaryah said: ‘how do we know that a person should not say: “I cannot wear a garment composed of a mixture of wool and linen; I cannot commit an incestuous relationship; I cannot eat pig, etc.,” but that a person should admit that he is perfectly capable of participating in those foods, etc.” [he meant a person should not be revolted by such things by nature so that he does not have to make a conscious decision to refrain from them. Ed] A person should feel that the reason he does not try and enjoy any of these otherwise attractive-looking foods and drinks, etc., is because G’d has put it out of bounds to us. This then is the meaning of: “I have separated you from the nations,” i.e. your separation has been divinely decreed. By accepting this decree you will keep away from committing sins and you will accept the yoke of heaven (instead of being slaves to your natural urges). The reason that in this instance the Torah refers to the other nations as העמים instead of as הגויים, [a term which at first glance seems to be complimentary to them, Ed.] is that the word means also חשכים, i.e. כהה, עמיא, “darker,” compare Onkelos on Leviticus 13,6 describing the white of the tzoraat becoming darker. The eyes of the nations have become blinded by being exposed to the brilliance of the light of the Torah. They suffer from the fact that they walk in darkness, having rejected the Torah. Moreover, they are destined for a sojourn in purgatory, a spiritually dark domain. The author quotes a few more verses describing the darkness enveloping the nations of the world.
   
   
   אמור
   
   
    
   שפתים ישק משיב דברים נכוחים, “he who gives the right answer is like giving a kiss on the lips.” (Proverbs 24,26.) Solomon taught us here about the advantage enjoyed by the wise man whose words are so pleasant to his listeners, everybody being anxious to listen to them. His words provide the answers to all the questions his listeners have either asked or have been meaning to ask. Solomon did not mean that such a wise man deserves to be kissed on his lips; after all what would his listeners learn from kissing him? Besides, if that had been Solomon’s meaning he should have written שפתים יושק, “the lips have been kissed,” or “the lips ought to be kissed.’” The meaning of the words is that the lips of the listeners “listen” to his words and feel as close to him as if they were kissing his lips. The listeners hang on every word such a wise man utters. His words are well received and welcome. This is the plain meaning of the verse we quoted.
    A kabbalistic approach: Solomon referred to the words spoken by the wise as נכוחים, “correct,” the word having a similar meaning to Proverbs 8,9 כלם נכוחים למבין, “they are all straightforward to those that possess knowledge.” Seeing that the word ישק, “will kiss,” describes close and intimate physical contact, Solomon employs this word which is familiar to us to describe close and intimate contact on an intellectual though abstract level. Solomon used similar wording in Song of Songs when he spoke of ישקני מנשיקות פיהו, “may he (G’d) kiss me with the kisses of His mouth,” (Song of Songs 1,2). There too the word is “borrowed,” describing spiritual values couched in language applicable to matters physical. The word שפתים, instead of meaning “lips” is derived from שפת הנהר, “the banks of the river,” meaning “the boundaries of the river.” Keeping this in mind, the meaning of the whole verse quoted above is: “the wise man who is tuned in to the fundamental aspects of wisdom in the celestial domains, a wisdom which is freely available at all times without interruption, can answer all questions and questioners correctly, being always in tune with them.” He can do this as he has reached the outermost limits (שפתים) of this wisdom.
    When we wish to understand the specific allure of this level of wisdom we should think of what our sages call מיתת נשיקה, “death by divine kiss,” i.e. mortal man achieving the ultimate cleaving to the divine that it is possible for a creature to achieve with its Creator.
    King David referred to this elevated spiritual level of the mutual attraction between G’d and man when he said in Psalms 91,14 (quoting G’d): כי בי חשק ואפלטהו, “because he is devoted to Me I will deliver him.” Any righteous person (צדיק) who has attained the spiritual level David spoke of here will not experience death as a form of destruction of the body or other faculties, but will experience it as a direct spiritual promotion. Three famous people who experienced such a “death” were Miriam, Aaron, and Moses. When the Torah reported their deaths” it always added the words,על פי ה', “a kiss of G’d.” In the case of Miriam the Torah did not use these words as it is not in keeping with accepted rules of decorum to speak of G’d as “kissing” a woman. (compare Numbers 33,38 Aaron, Deut. 34,5, Moses). We have it on the authority of Rabbi Elazar (Baba Batra 17) that Miriam experienced the same kind of death as did her brothers as there is a גזרה שוה, a textural nuance not justifiable by the rules of syntax or grammar, which links Moses and Miriam. In connection with the deaths of all these three great personalities the Torah writes an extraneous word שם, “there.” Rabbi Elazar sees in this a hint that they all died in a similar manner, but that the Torah wished to avoid saying this outright in the case of Miriam as we have already pointed out.
    We find a similar linkage of the three patriarchs by means of the respective words בכל, מכל, כל describing the blessings each received from G’d. Another individual who experienced this kind of “death” was Rabbi Yehudah hanassi (editor of the Mishnah). We know this as according to tradition the priests took part in his funeral. Had he died at the hands of the angel of death, the priests would not have been allowed to defile themselves by participating actively in his funeral (last rites). 
    According to Ketuvot 104 when Rabbi Yehudah hanassi was about to die, he raised his ten fingers toward heaven exclaiming: “Lord, You are aware that I have toiled with all my ten fingers and have not even used the smallest one to indulge in the pleasures of this world. May it be Your will that my “rest” (hereafter) will be one of undisturbed tranquillity.” Thereupon a heavenly echo was heard saying: יבא שלום ינוח על משכנו, “may he come to peace and rest on his couch” (compare Isaiah 57,2).
    
    We have a passage in the Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 3,1 according to which when Rabbi Yehudah hanassi died Rabbi Yannai exclaimed “the laws applicable to the priesthood do not apply today.” He referred to the fact that the priests must not defile themselves by touching a corpse or being under the same roof as a dead body. This is because if they did they would disqualify themselves from performing service in the Temple until such time as they had purified themselves. What Rabbi Yannai had in mind was that seeing that Rabbi Yehudah did not die the kind of death other mortals die, i.e. at the hands of the angel of death, the rule about priests not being allowed to touch his body or being in his proximity did not apply to them concerning him. This statement of Rabbi Yannai was to apply only on that day and only to that particular corpse.
    
    21,1. אמור אל הכהנים בני אהרן ואמרת אליהם לנפש לא יטמא בעמיו, “speak to the Priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them “none of them must defile himself through a dead person among his people.” The verse commences with the words: ”say to the Priests,” and immediately repeats: “and tell them!” Why the repetition? We need to understand the sequence as follows: “say to the Priests whatever was written in the previous paragraph, and now add new information, i.e. laws recorded forthwith and applicable specifically to the priests.” The reason that the Priests had to be instructed in the legislation contained in chapter 20 was that they were the foremost teachers of the Jewish people and therefore had to be conversant with all legislation concerning civil law such as marriages, etc.
    Our sages (Yevamot 114) understand the repetition to mean that the adults were to warn the minors concerning all these laws. One was not to make use of one’s children while they were not yet of age to perform tasks for their parents which the Torah had forbidden to be carried out by adults. This warning includes many of the prohibitions of the Torah whether in the field of ritual impurity, violations of the Sabbath by minors, consumption of forbidden food by minors, etc. On the other hand, if minors choose to carry out such tasks forbidden to their elders without having been urged to do so, the parents are not commanded to stop them. To make sure we do not act in this manner the Torah repeated the exhortation “say to them,” to teach us that we do have to train the young priests already to distance themselves from all that is forbidden to the adult priests.
    A Midrashic approach (Tanchuma 3, Emor): the first word אמור is a directive to the priest to defile himself for the sake of burying a dead who has no one else to bury him. The second word אמר is to forbid the priest to defile himself on other corpses. The reason the Torah had to write the words הכהנים, “the priests,” (seeing that by being sons of Aaron we already know that they are priests), the Torah wanted to exempt people who genetically are priests but are disqualified from carrying out priestly functions for reasons of some kind of illegitimate genealogy (חללים).
   בני אהרן, “sons of Aaron,” etc. Our sages in Sotah 23 understand this as excluding female descendants of priests, i.e. “the sons of Aaron but not the daughters of Aaron.” I have explained the reason why the female offspring of priests is not considered as priests in the full sense of the word in my commentary on Parshat Tzav (Leviticus 6,19) as due to the woman having been the one who brought death into the world. This does not make them fit to act as priests, i.e. people who are concerned with preserving and extending life.
    The reason that this paragraph of special laws for the priests has been written immediately after the verse prohibiting the law of how to deal with sorcerers, various kinds of performers of magic, is explained in the Midrash as justified by subsequent Jewish history. King Saul killed an entire city of Priests (Nof), compare Samuel I 22,18 appointing Doeg their accuser to be the executioner. [There had not been the kind of evidence that the priests had committed treason against Saul which would stand up in court. Ed.] Subsequently, when King Saul found himself in a quandary when he did want advice from G’d and was refused it, he turned to a necromancer despite the express prohibition to even allow such people to live in Leviticus 20,27. G’d had foreseen all this and had written these two commandments, i.e. to give precedence to the priests and to abhor necromancers as a warning to Saul and others not to become guilty of the sin described. 
    Isaiah 8,19 deals with this subject when he writes addressing the common folk who might be asked to practice the art of necromancy by saying: “should the people say to you, ‘inquire of the ghosts and familiar spirits that chirp and moan, for a people may inquire of its divine beings,- of the dead on behalf of the living,- for instruction and message;’ by responding: ‘surely for one who speaks thus there shall be no dawn.” Isaiah’s point is that if such a practice is raising its head in Israel the people have to respond that they get any information they are desirous of from their G’d directly, not from charlatans, etc. The prophet Elijah had remonstrated with King Achazyah who had sent inquiries to idols of other nations, and had challenged him saying: “are there then no representatives of the true Lord in Israel that you saw fit to inquire from deities like Baal Zevuv and others?” (Kings II 1,6). In the event that the people feel that they have no legitimate address from which to inquire about their future, the Torah goes on record in Deut. 17,9: “you will come to the priests, the Levites, or to the judge who will officiate in those days; when you inquire they will tell you.”
    Rabbi Yehoshua from the village Sakinin said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi that G’d showed Moses a bird’s eye view of all subsequent generations and their respective leaders. He showed him King Saul, his sons, and his death by the sword of the Jewish people’s enemies. This was part of the panorama G’d showed to Moses. Moses was aghast and exclaimed: “the first King of the Jewish people should have such a tragic end, should be stabbed by a sword?” Thereupon G’d told Moses to write down the paragraph we are now dealing with. Thus far Rabbi Yehoshua (compare Tanchuma Emor 2). I plan to explain the details about the various forms of necromancy, etc., in connection with Parshat Shoftim, (seeing there are different views about this subject). 
    
    21,2. כי אם לשארו, “except for his wife.” The sages explain that the word שאר means “wife,” i.e. someone whose relationship is that of shared flesh. The Torah adds the word הקרוב, “which is physically close,” to exclude a wife who has been betrothed to him but has not yet completed the marriage ceremony and moved into her husband’s home (חופה). Similarly, a divorced wife is also no longer considered part of her former husband’s flesh so that her ex-husband if a priest may defile himself in order to actively participate in her funeral (compare Sifra Emor 1,4).
    Even though a priest is called “holy,” and the Torah warns us that due to his elevated status he must not defile himself with a corpse, it is a positive commandment that he does defile himself when his wife has died. It is incumbent upon him to actively participate in her funeral. Should he be unwilling to do so, the court may force him to do so against his will. Sifra 1,12 reports of a certain priest by the name of Joseph whose wife died on the eve of Passover and he did not want to defile himself at her funeral and thereby forego the Passover offering. The court forced him to defile himself by participating in his wife’s funeral. The defilement the Torah speaks about is being in the same house, or even standing under the branches of the same tree as the body concerned. Not only direct contact with the corpse is forbidden. Whatever applies to the priest’s participation in his wife’s funeral also applies to his participating in the funeral of his mother and father. However, subsequent to the funeral, this same priest must not again defile himself by visiting the grave of his wife or parents in the cemetery and defying the rules of ritual purity. Even at the time of the funeral the priest is not allowed to roam in the cemetery and thereby contaminate himself through the proximity of other graves he has come too close too. This is what the sages (Shemot Rabbah 5,18 [not found there Ed.]) had in mind when they asked the rhetorical question: “who has ever seen a priest in a cemetery?”
   לאמו ולאביו, “for his father or his mother” he may defile himself. In this instance the Torah mentioned the mother first, whereas in verse 11 where the Torah prohibits the High Priest from defiling himself on account of his parents’ death the Torah mentions the father before the mother. Perhaps seeing that the Torah had first mentioned a female relative of the priest when introducing the subject of ritual defilement and using the priest’s wife as an example of whose funeral overrides the legislation, the Torah felt that it wanted to continue with female examples. Had the Torah written: כי אם לשארו לאביו ולאמו, the sequence would not have been consistent as female, male, and female, in that order would have seemed illogical. Alternatively, the Torah mentioned the mother first as there is no doubt about the maternity of a person’s mother, whereas there is always some doubt about the paternity of someone claiming to be the father. The Torah therefore proceeds from that which is obvious, i.e. the duty to defile himself on account of one’s mother’s death, to the less obvious  and to include the father in that legislation although there is no absolute certainty that he was indeed the father.
    When it comes to prohibiting the High Priest to defile himself on account of the death of his parents, the opposite consideration is in place. Not only must the High Priest not defile himself on account of a father (who may not be a father), but even the death of his mother does not entitle him to defile himself at her funeral.
    The reason the Torah limits the sister to one who is still a “virgin,” something that is presumed seeing she has not yet been married, is to exclude an unmarried sister who has been the victim of a rapist. The word הקרובה, “who is close to him,” means that even though his sister may have been betrothed, as long as she was not fully married her status as a close relative of her brother the priest has not been affected. The apparently extraneous word אליו, “to him,” in our verse refers to an unmarried sister who is past the age of puberty. The words אשר לא היתה לאיש, “who has not been wed to a man,” include a girl whose hymen has been ruptured through penetration by some instrument other than a man’s member. She retains her status as a virginal sister. Maimonides Hilchot Avelut 2,10 rules that a priest must defile himself on account of such sisters.
    
    21,4. לא יטמא בעל בעמיו, “a husband (priest) among his people shall not defile himself to someone who has defiled him through marriage (forbidden union).” According to Rashi what is meant is that if a priest has married someone forbidden to him under Jewish law, he is not allowed to subsequently defile himself at such a woman’s funeral.
    Nachmanides, however, understands the word בעל as not speaking of a husband (or even a bachelor or widower) who is a priest, but of a non-priest who is of prominent social position. He supplies proof for the use of the word בעל in that context from Samuel II 6,2 בעלי יהודה, “the notables of Yehudah.” According to Nachmanides the Torah legislates that a socially highly placed husband must not defile himself on the dead if such participation results in his demeaning himself. The comparison to the priest who is not to defile himself on the dead is based on the social status of the priest which is the highest level of society. Therefore, other men of stature, who similarly occupy prominent positions should be judicious about where and when they defile themselves. Sifra Emor 1,3 claims that the word בעמיו means that a מת מצוה, a stray corpse who appears to have no relatives, is exempt from the legislation in this verse, and even socially highly placed persons must busy themselves forthwith with the burial of such a corpse.
    
    21,6. קדושים יהיו לאלוהיהם, “they are to remain holy to their G’d.” This apparently superfluous comment means that the priests should practice a degree of abstinence, caution of coming close to temptation, over and above what is required of ordinary Israelites. Matters which are permitted to ordinary Israelites, and which therefore are not displeasing in the eyes of the Lord per se, are nevertheless out of bounds for the priests. These include marrying divorcees, women who had been unchaste at one time or another, etc. It is not appropriate for people who derive their food from G’d’s Altar to associate with the categories of people listed in an intimate relationship The word זונה in our verse includes a woman who had sexual relations with someone forbidden to her as a marriage partner. The word חללה refers to someone born of one of the five categories of marriages forbidden to be entered into by priests. On the other hand, priests (other than the High priest) are permitted to marry widows. This is the meaning of the verse in Ezekiel 44,22 והאלמנה אשר תהיה אלמנה מכהן יקחו, “but some priests may marry a widow;” (i.e. a priest who is not  High Priest).
    
    21,9. באש תשרף, “she is to be consumed by fire.”  Had the Torah written the sequence תשרף באש, I would have understood that the meaning is that the daughter mentioned is to be literally burned to death on a pile of wood set afire. The Torah’s method of execution by what is called שרפה is not similar to burning someone on a pyre. The body of the guilty party is most certainly not destroyed by fire. I have found that the sages in Pessachim 75 when discussing how the Passover is to be prepared for eating, discuss the finer points of what is written. The Torah had stipulated that the Passover has to be eaten after it has been צלי אש, “roasted over the fire.” The sages there say that the words באש תשרף “she is to be burned by fire,” include all possible methods of burning as long as the course of the burning is fire. Rav Matnah stated that the way this penalty is applied is through administering molten lead to the party to be executed and pouring it into the larynx so that instant death occurs. He points to the difference in the wording of the Torah in Leviticus 4,12 when the parts of a bull which serves as a sin-offering for the High Priest is burnt outside the camp except for the parts offered on the Altar. The wording there is that ושרף אותו על עצים באש, “he shall burn it on wood in fire.” You will note that the Torah describes the process of burning before mentioning fire, the reverse of what is written in our verse here. It is therefore likely that the penalty of death by burning applicable to the daughter of the priest mentioned in our verse results in injuries similar to those suffered by the sons of Aaron when heavenly fire entered their nostrils. In other words, the life-force, נשמה, is burned whereas the body remains intact. 
    
    21,10. והכהן הגדול מאחיו, “and the priest who is exalted above his brethren,” according to the plain meaning of the text seeing that the Torah had already listed special restrictions applicable to ordinary priests who must not marry certain categories of women and who must refrain from defiling themselves other than to the closest relatives, the Torah now adds additional restrictions which apply to the High Priest. This is natural seeing that the High Priest’s duties require him to be even closer to the Shechinah than ordinary priests. The Torah categorised the High Priest’s function as מן המקדש לא יצא, “he must not leave the Sanctuary.” The reason that the High Priest is to marry only a previously unmarried virgin is to ensure that she will be amenable to his outlook and opinions. Such a woman cannot make comparisons between her husband the High Priest and her previous husband.
    A Midrashic approach: (Sifra Emor 2,1) The words והכהן הגדול מאחיו (emphasis on the letter ה in הגדול) mean that the High Priest must be superior to his priestly colleagues in five areas. He has to be more handsome, physically stronger, materially wealthier, wiser, and more dignified. If he does not have sufficient material wealth, the other priests are to chip in from their own wealth to make him independently wealthy. This is alluded to in the word מאחיו, i.e. his wealth may originate with his brethren.
    It happened with a priest called Pinchas who was a professional stone mason that he was elected to become High Priest; when his fellow priests came to the quarry from which he made his livelihood, they filled it with gold pieces in order to make him financially independent.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words והכהן הגדול מאחיו; he is the person who is always conscious who his role model is, i.e. the Lord Himself. He is flanked by his deputy on the right and the president of the Supreme Court on his left. This parallels the vision of the seraphim described in Yuma 37, a reference to the encounter between an angel and Yehoshua the High Priest in Zecharyah 3,7 where the angel assured the High Priest that he would be someone making spiritual progress as opposed to the angels flanking him who are spiritually stationary. This was a  hint that the spiritual parameters within which the High Priest was to move consisted of the Sanctuary and what this symbolised. In the verse from Zecharyah mentioned, Yonatan ben Uzziel translated the words בין העומדים האלה as a reference to the angels called seraphim which were flanking him. The Targum based himself on what Isaiah described in his opening vision (Isaiah 6,2) שרפים עומדים ממעל לו, that he had perceived the seraphim as standing in attendance for the Shechinah which he beheld seated on a throne in that vision.
    There is another Baraitha which discusses these phenomena describing three men walking together, the tallest in the middle, flanked by a גדול on his right and a קטן on his left. When the three angels visited Avraham (Genesis 18,3) the angel Michael was in the centre, Gavriel on his right, and Raphael on his left. If you are fortunate you will appreciate that our verse tries to teach us something analogous and that is why the wording הכהן הגדול has been selected to describe the High Priest. It is reminiscent of Deut. 11,7 את כל מעשה ה' הגדול אשר עשה, “all the great work of Hashem which He did;” The word גדול has first and foremost a qualitative dimension rather than being a description of physical properties possessed by the High Priest; our sages in Horiot 12 understood the second half of our verse in which the Torah directs that the High Priest must not leave his head unshorn, etc., as a direct corollary of his function of being the people’s representative before the Lord. They understand the restrictions mentioned here as applying also to the two people always flanking the High Priest. There is some disagreement as to whether the words לא יפרום, that the High Priest must not rend his garments (as a sign of mourning for a relative who has died), refer only to the visible outer garments or also to the garments covering his skin. The disagreement of the scholars as to the halachah in that instance reflects 1) the view that only people of a lesser stature than he, i.e. ordinary priests, are allowed to rend their garments in acknowledging their state of mourning. 2) the other opinion which holds that the High Priest must tear his undergarments in such situations. This would be an allusion that the procedure where it is visible is aimed at people of a spiritually lower level, whereas seeing that the High Priest is in a class by himself, addressing himself only to the highest spiritual level, Hashem, does not display such signs of mourning to his peers but gives vent to the emotion of mourning nonetheless by rending his undergarments. 
    
    21,14. כי עם בתולה מעמיו, “except for a virgin from his people.” Why is this verse necessary, seeing that it has just been written in verse 13 that he must marry a virgin? According to Kidushin 10 the repetition teaches that if the High Priest performed marital intercourse with his wife to be (by mutual consent) relying on this as the act acquiring her as his wife, this is not admissible in his case, [although a legal option to anyone else. Ed.] The reason is that halachically speaking, the completion of the act of coitus is when the acquisition becomes effective, i.e. a point in time when the girl in question is technically no longer a virgin. Technically she became a בעולת עצמו, a woman who had already had intercourse with the same man. A High Priest is forbidden to marry a בעולת עצמו no less than he is forbidden to marry someone who had had sexual relations with another male. This prohibition is known in the Talmud as לאו הבא מכלל עשה, “a negative commandment which is the logical result of a positive commandment related to the same subject.”
    
    21,17. דבר אל אהרן לאמר איש מזדעך, “speak to Aaron saying: ‘any man of your offspring, etc.’”  Nachmanides points out that the Torah here does not instruct Moses to speak to Aaron and his sons as it does in all other instances (compare Leviticus 6,18 et al) where Moses is instructed to speak to Aaron, but here only Aaron was to be addressed and told the law that physically blemished priests must not perform service in the Tabernacle. The reason may be that in the other instances such matters as the rules pertaining to the burnt-offering, the sin-offering, the gift-offering, etc., were the subject of the instructions, and Aaron’s sons were directly involved.
    Had the Torah written in this instance: “speak to Aaron and his sons,” it should have followed this with the words: איש מכם לדורותיכם, “if any one of your descendants has a blemish, etc.” The Torah did not want to include Aaron himself in a verse referring to physical blemishes. By choosing the wording in front of us, i.e. איש מזרעך לדורותם, “a man of your offspring in their respective generations,” the Torah placed a qualitative distance between Aaron and his future offspring.
    Our sages enumerated a multitude of physical defects each of which disqualifies a priest from performing sacrificial service. The Torah here begins the list by mentioning missing or inoperative organs, such as the blind, the lame, followed by relatively minor defects such as a nose without a bridge, or limbs of uneven length. This is followed by priests suffering from broken limbs on their arms or legs. Even priests whose external appearance is esthetically displeasing are included in the list. Blemishes which are not normally invisible, such as crushed testicles, are also a cause for disqualifying the priest from performing most priestly functions.
    When the Torah repeats the words אשר בו מום, “who suffers from a blemish,” this means that regardless of whether the priest has suffered from the blemish from birth or whether the blemish occurred during his lifetime, he is unfit to perform service in the Temple. The Torah continues  (chapter 22, 22-24) by listing physical blemishes which disqualify an animal from serving as an acceptable sacrificial offering on the Altar. Included in these animals which do not qualify as sacrifices are the ones which have genetic defects such as uneven limbs or a hoof which is not split. Defects which develop during the lifetime of the animal certainly disqualify it as an offering on the Altar. Defects to the eye are serious even if the sight is not affected but the eye looks diseased.
    
    22,24. ובארצכם לא תעשו, “and in your land you shall not do (them).” Seeing the Torah had mentioned such defects as damage to the reproductive organs earlier in our verse, the Torah adds that it is forbidden to castrate animals in the land of Israel even if such animals were not intended as offerings. Even animals which are not fit for consumption by Jews must not be castrated. Contrary to the first impression that the word בארצכם, “in your land,” suggests that only in the land of Israel is it forbidden to castrate animals, this is misleading, and castrating G’d’s creatures is forbidden everywhere. The only reason the Torah wrote that word was to emphasise that even in our land where many of these animals cannot serve the general population as food seeing the animals in question are ritually impure, we must still not castrate such animals as a means of keeping down their numbers. 
    It is also possible that the use by the Torah of the word תעשו here points out that castrating an animal is equivalent to “undoing it;” G’d made it, we undo it but allow it to live at the same time preventing it from procreating. We find a similar use of the word לעשות in Kohelet 4,17 where Solomon speaks about כי אינם יודעים לעשות רע, “for they do not know that they are to destroy the evil and remove it.” At first glance we would have translated the verse as “they do not know how to do evil,” something that clearly does not fit the context of the verse.“ [Rashi does not have trouble with the ordinary meaning of the word לעשות in that verse. Ed.] Another verse in which the word עשה does not have the meaning which it usually has is Genesis 9,24 where the Torah speaks about אשר עשה לו בנו הקטן, normally translated as “which his younger son had done to him,” (Noach who had been naked in his tent). On the face of it, the son (Cham) had done nothing except tell his brothers that their father had uncovered himself while drunk. Nonetheless, our sages in Sanhedrin 70 use the word to mean that he had castrated his father. So we see that the word עשה, though normally meaning “did” in a constructive sense such as when G’d created the universe, may appear in exactly the opposite sense such as when depriving the animal of its regenerative potential by castrating it. This may also be the meaning of the word יעשנה in Proverbs 6,32, where Solomon writes משחית נפשו יעשנה, which at first glance looks as if he says that “he who destroys his life is really creating it.” Instead, the meaning is “if he wants to destroy himself let him do such a thing (commit adultery).” When someone destroys his soul, his life, he most certainly deprives (יעשנה) it of the opportunity to achieve its lofty aims..”
    
    22,27. שור או כשב או עז כי יולד, “when an ox, a lamb, or a goat is born, etc.” Sifra at the beginning of Parshat Shemini comments on the sequence of these words “let the ox come and atone for the image of the ox (golden calf),” as David said in Psalms 106,20: “they traded their honour for the image of an ox.” We find a similar exegesis in connection with the gifts to be given for the building of the Tabernacle when Exodus 25,3 speaks first of gifts of “gold, silver, and copper.” According to the Midrash, the gold was to atone for the contributions of gold made by the Israelites which enabled the golden calf to be made. Tanchuma Terumah 8 says that this gold was to atone for the gold contributed at that time. The Midrash Tanchuma Emor 11 quotes Hoseah 7,3 ברעתם ישמחו מלך, “with the thing which represented their wickedness they make a king happy,” i.e. the very instrument of the sin  became the instrument of their expiation. Rabbi Levi asked: “What caused the Torah to make the ox the principal animal amongst the sacrificial offerings?” He explains this by means of a parable. A prominent lady at the king’s court had been slandered by other courtiers claiming she had committed adultery with the prime minister. The king had these accusations examined and could not find any substantiation for them. What did the king do then? He gave a dinner party and seated the prime minister who had been the victim of these rumours in the seat of honour in order to show one and all that his investigation had proved the accusations as unfounded. Similarly, G’d examined Satan’s accusation that the Jewish people had made the golden calf; He concluded that they had not, that the golden calf had been the work of the proselytes who had joined the Jewish people at the
 Exodus. They had been the ones who had said: “these are your gods O Israel” This is why the ox (the subject of the slander) became the chief animal amongst the sacrificial animals. Rabbi Levi spoke of a “society lady,” meaning the Jewish people.
    Personally, I would like to add  that according to tradition the “prime minister” in that parable is one of the senior ministers at G’d’s court. In order to make plain that the natural born Jews had not been the ones who had initiated the sin of the golden calf, He determined that henceforth the ox would be the primary animal to feature in sacrificial offerings.
    You will find that similarly the fruit of the עץ הדר, “the tree whose fruit Chavah had eaten in Gan Eden,” became the favourite fruit amongst the four species of plants with which we praise the Lord on the festival of Tabernacles. The fact that the Torah mentions the etrog before the palm frond, a much larger plant, is to indicate that whereas Chavah sinned because she was a victim of deception by the serpent, her husband Adam sinned both in thought and in deed when he ate of that fruit also.
    We find that history repeats itself in that Adam atoned for his sin by offering an ox as a sacrifice; similarly his descendants, especially highly placed ones, have to offer an ox as their sin-offering when such an offering is called for. This is the deeper meaning of the verse in Hoseah we quoted, that with the very item which their sin consisted of they subsequently pleased the Lord. According to Chulin 60 Adam offered a single-horned bull as his sin-offering. 
    We find a verse which combines both the word שור and the word הדר, thereby alluding to the two examples of the instrument of the sin becoming the instrument of pleasing the Lord. The verse in question is in Deut. 33,17: בכור שורו הדר לו, which we may translate allegorically as: “just as we praise Him with the fruit of the tree הדר, so we atone for our sins by means of the ox, the symbol of original forgiveness.”
    In a verse preceding the verse from Hoseah we quoted, the prophet said (Hoseah 6,7) והמה כאדם עברו ברית, “they violated the covenant like just like Adam,” an allusion to the comparison of the sin of the golden calf by the Israelites and that of Adam in Gan Eden. On the one hand, the animal which had helped Adam atone for his sin had become the one atoning for the sins of the Israelites. On the other hand, looked at from a philosophical point of view, the Israelites thought that this animal had proven to be the salvation of mankind, i.e. Adam, once, hence it might again become the symbol of their future, seeing Moses had not come back. In fact. Adam had been the original cause of the sin the Israelites participated in. [my own phraseology in trying to convey this line of reasoning. Ed.]
    The reason that the Torah permitted just three categories of ritually pure beasts as potential sacrifices for the altar is in deference to the three patriarchs Avraham, Yitzchak, and Yaakov. The ox symbolises Avraham, of whom the Torah wrote that he ran to the cattle in order to serve a meal to the three angels who visited him as reported in Genesis 18,1-15. The sheep is in deference to Yitzchak, when it was offered as a burnt-offering in his stead in Genesis 22,14. The goat was selected in deference to Yaakov who took the two goats at the behest of his mother in order to secure the blessing from his father (Genesis 27,9) (compare Tanchuma Emor 12). These goats were described in the Torah as טובים, “good,” meaning they were to be good both for him personally as well as for his descendants, seeing that by means of two male goats the Jewish people, Yaakov’s descendants, would secure atonement for their sins on the Day of Atonement. When the Torah therefore wrote: “an ox, a sheep, or a goat which will be born, etc.”, it referred to known functions of these animals on behalf of the Jewish people.
    This is what Solomon had in mind when he wrote in Kohelet 3,15: “What has been already exists, and what is still to come has already been, and G’d always seeks out the pursued.” What Solomon meant was that if someone were to say to you: “if Adam had not sinned at the time when he ate from the tree of knowledge would he still be alive and well nowadays?” You may answer him that the prophet Elijah did not sin and he did indeed not die but is alive to this day. As to the words אשר להיות, “what is still to come,” if someone believes that the idea of G’d resurrecting the dead is something which occurs only in the future [i.e. we have no proof of something like that being possible, Ed.], tell him that it has already occurred, i.e. that both the prophet Elijah, the prophet Elisha, as well as the prophet Ezekiel are on record as having revived the dead (Tanchuma Emor 9). Finally, the words והאלוהים יבקש את הנרדף in the verse from Kohelet which we quoted, means that whereas the righteous pursue (imitate and try to emulate) the other righteous people who preceded them this is normal and appropriate. The wicked persecute both other wicked people as well as righteous people; this is their nature; however, G’d seeks out the persecuted (righteous ones to save them). If you look for proof, read history. Hevel had been persecuted by his brother Kayin; in response G’d turned to Hevel’s offering while rejecting the gift of Kayin (Genesis 4,4-5). Noach had been ridiculed and persecuted by the people of his generation. G’d responded to Noach positively as stated in Genesis 6,8: “Noach found favour in the eyes of G’d.” Shortly afterwards we are told that all the remainder of mankind was wiped out (Genesis 7,23). Avraham was persecuted by Nimrod; he was saved as we know from Nechemyah 9,7 where it is written: “You are the Lord G’d who have chosen Avraham and removed (rescued) him from the fire of the Chaldaens.” Yitzchak was persecuted by the Philistines; in the end Avimelech (King of the Philistines) acknowledged his rigtheousness, G’d’s power and asked to make a treaty with him (Genesis 26,28). Yaakov was persecuted by Esau; nonetheless we have been told in Psalms 135,4: “for G’d chose for Himself Yaakov, Israel, etc.” Joseph was persecuted by his brothers only to become a most successful individual, i.e. “the Lord was with Joseph and he became a successful man” (Genesis 39,2). Moses was persecuted by Pharaoh, but G’d thwarted Pharaoh’s efforts to kill him. The Jewish people were persecuted by the pagans; this is why G’d chose them as His people, as we know from Deut. 14,2: “and the Lord chose you to be His special people.” In our situation we find something parallel. The animals mentioned here are normally the innocent victims of predatory animals. The ox is hunted by the lion, the sheep by the wolf, the goat by the leopard. G’d chose the animals as suitable for sacrificial offerings because they were the persecuted ones, saying: “do not offer Me animals which are pursuers, predators, but certain categories of their victims, the persecuted.”
   והיה שבעת ימים תחת אמו, “it shall remain under the care of its mother for seven days.” This may best be understood by means of a parable (Tanchuma Emor 12). A king who visited a country issued a decree that no one would be allowed an audience with him until after they had paid their respects to a certain lady of high society. Similarly, G’d said to the people of Israel: “you may not offer Me a sacrificial offering until after that animal has paid its respects to My daughter, (society lady in the parable) i.e. to the Sabbath.  Just as there is no week one day of which is not a Sabbath, so there cannot be a circumcision until the baby in question has experienced at least one Sabbath. (compare Tanchuma Emor 12). The “society lady” in the parable should be the first thought in the mind of the party offering the animal.
    
    22,28. ושור או שה, אותו ואת בנו לא תשחטו ביום אחד, “and an ox and its (son) young, you shall not slaughter on the same day.” Seeing that the Torah has already mentioned that there is a special commandment regarding sacrificial animals and their offspring, i.e. that the young must not be separated from the mother for at least seven days before it may be offered up as a sacrifice, the Torah immediately lists another related command-ment, namely not to offer both the mother animal and the young on one and the same day. First of all, contrary to the impression gained from the grammar in the verse, the ruling applies to female animals, i.e. mother and young, not father and young. It is perfectly in order to slaughter the calf’s father  with the calf on the same day (Chulin 79). This also corresponds to the way Onkelos translates the words, i.e. ותורתא או שיתא לה וברה, “and a cow and a sheep, her and her “son.” In other words, the law applies to mother animals. According to this halachah, the difficulty is that the Torah should have written ופרה ובנה, instead of ושור ובנה. Or, at least, if the Torah considered the word שור as the generic term for the category of cattle, it should have continued  with the words אותה ואת בנה, instead of the misleading אותו ואת בנו. However, seeing that the Torah already spoke about a female animal and her son when mentioning the law not to offer the young animal during the first seven days, by continuing with this legislation immediately the Torah hinted that here too we are speaking about a law applying to the mother animal and its young. This is the interpretation of Nachmanides. 
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Emor 13 draws a parallel between Proverbs 12,10; “the righteous man knows the soul (needs) of his beast; but the compassion of the wicked is cruelty.” The “righteous one” in that verse is a reference to the Almighty who has said that mother animal and its young are not to be slaughtered on the same day; by contrast the compassion of the wicked cited by Solomon refers to someone like Haman who decreed that all Jews of all generations be killed on the same day (Esther 3,13). Another example of the righteous (G’d) knowing the needs of his beast is reflected in the legislation in Deut. 22,6 that the mother bird is to be sent off before its nest is to be robbed of its chicks or eggs. By contrast, the “compassion for the wicked which is cruelty” was demonstrated by Sancheriv the wicked of whom it is written (Hoseah 10,14) “when mothers and babes were dashed to death together.” 
    
    22,32. ולא תחללו את שם קדשי ונקדשתי בתוך בני ישראל, “You shall not desecrate My holy Name, rather I should be sanctified among the Children of Israel.” Desecration of the Lord’s name is the most serious sin. We find that on occasion G’d ignored the sin of idolatry while not ignoring the sin of desecrating His name. This is what Ezekiel referred to when he said: (Ezekiel 20,39) “As for you, O house of Israel, thus said the Lord G’d: “go, every one of you and worship his fetishes and continue, if you will not obey Me; but do not profane My holy Name anymore.”
    Our sages in Yuma 86 state that the sin of desecrating the holy Name of G’d is not one for which the Day of Atonement brings forgiveness. Even repentance does not suspend the punishment due for this sin for a period of time. Even the suffering of afflictions does not wipe out this sin. If one is guilty of the sin of desecrating the name of G’d such a sin is at best “suspended” and  the death of the sinner may eventually assist in wiping out this sin.
    There is, however, one way of counteracting the sin of desecrating the holy Name of the Lord. This is the sanctification of the Lord’s Name in public by the person who was guilty of desecrating it. The Torah alludes to this when writing: ונקדשתי בתוך בני ישראל, “I want to be sanctified among the Children of Israel.” We have another verse in Proverbs 16,6: “sin will be expiated through kindness and truth;” this means that the sin of desecrating the holy Name of the Lord through speaking lies and committing other sins may be counterbalanced by the subsequent performance of deeds of kindness and truth, thus reversing the damage one had become guilty of. It is somewhat similar to the person afflicted with a disease who can only be cured by imbibing the very opposite ingredients which had caused his sickness. Our sages said: “if a person sinned with his tongue let him engage in Torah study. If he sinned by improper use of his eyes, let him shed many tears;” this is what David alluded to when he said (Psalms119,136) “my eyes shed streams of tears because they did not obey Your teaching.” Note that David did not say: “I did not 
obey Your commandments;” but he shed the tears because “they did not obey.” The “they” he referred to were his eyes. Concerning this same subject, i.e. how to reverse the negative effect of the sins one has committed, the sages in Vayikra Rabbah 21,4 say that if one has committed a whole package of sins, one should endeavour to offset them with a similar package of commandments performed carefully. If one’s feet had been eager to rush towards an opportunity to commit a sin, they should now be at least as eager to run towards an opportunity to perform good deeds. If one’s hands had been in the habit of spilling the blood of the innocent, the same hands should become preoccupied with the laying of phylacteries accompanied by the liberal distribution of money to the poor.
    The following Midrash spells out the advice to counter the sin of desecrating the holy Name of G’d by performing public acts of sanctifying that Name (Sifra Emor 9,4-5). The author understands the directive: “I want to be sanctified among the Children of Israel” as a call for someone to risk his life for the sanctification of the Lord’s name. I might have thought that one could have fulfilled this directive by risking his life on behalf of G’d in private; the Torah adds the words “among the Children of Israel,” to teach that this directive is aimed at performing such an act in public. When doing so one must not hope that G’d would save one but must really be prepared to die for the cause. Anyone who publicly risks his life on behalf of G’d’s name hoping thereby to become the beneficiary of a miracle by G’d will not experience such a miracle. If, however, such a person is clearly resigned to the fact that G‘d will not rescue him, a miracle is liable to be performed for him as occurred in the incident of Chananyah, Mishael, and Azaryah, all of whom were defying the threats of Nevuchadnezzar and who chose to become martyrs explaining that they did not do so in order to demonstrate G’d’s power to save them (compare Daniel 3,18). [The author had elaborated on this drawing on a Midrash in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 7,13 describing these martyrs’ previous discussion with the prophet Ezekiel. Ed.] Furthermore, our sages use this verse a proof that matters involving sanctification of G’d’s Name [not necessarily risking one’s life, but prayers such as the Kedushah, Ed.] have to have an audience of at least ten male adults. They draw a comparison between the death of the ten spies in  a group described by the Torah as עדה, a “community,” i.e. the minimum number of adult males to which this term can be applied. (Compare Berachot 21). Rabbeinu Yaakov (Tossaphist) already comments on that statement in the Talmud that it is not admissible to derive such halachic rules from an example of the ten spies, i.e. “an ungodly” congregation rather than a “holy congregation.”
    The principal message of that discussion in the Talmud is the word בתוך, “amongst.” Clearly, when the word is used here it means “a holy congregation.” When the word appears in connection with Joseph’s ten brothers entering Egypt (Genesis 42,5) it is the Torah’s way of hinting that these brothers at that time were also a holy congregation. [There are many Midrashim proving that the brothers were bent on rescuing Joseph during their trip, certainly a holy task, and one that involved danger to themselves as evident in the story with Benjamin during their second trip. Ed.]
    
    23,2. אלה הם מועדי, “these are My festivals.” The Sabbath is included here in the list of festivals seeing it is a fixed day in the calendar. The Torah describes the Sabbath here as שבת היא לה' בכל מושבותיכם, instead of the more customary חקת עולם לדורותיכם, “an eternal statute for your generations in all your dwellings,” as that wording would have implied that the work-prohibition on the Sabbath would apply universally in every location for all times. Under the circumstances, the wording suggests that the work-prohibition applies only in “your dwellings, not in the Temple, i.e. G’d’s dwelling.
    
    23,4. אלה מועדי ה' מקראי קודש אשר תקראו אותם, “These are the appointed times of the Lord, holy convocations, which you are to proclaim, etc.” The Torah describes all the festivals as related to the attribute Hashem. The reason the word אלה is used to introduce them is that that word symbolises something permanent, enduring. The message is that these festivals will not become redundant through historic developments in the future. As long as this physical universe will continue to exist the Jewish people will continue to observe these festivals. This is also what is meant when the Torah wrote the words לנו ולבנינו עד עולם, “for us and our children forever” (Deut. 29,28), i.e. the laws of the Torah apply for all foreseeable future times.
    Tanchuma Pinchas 17 relates that a Gentile once asked Rabbi Akiva why the Jews were still celebrating the festivals  when the prophet (Isaiah 1,14) had told the people that “G’d hated your new moons and your festivals, etc.” Rabbi Akiva answered that if Isaiah had spoken of “My new moons, My festivals,” instead of: “your new moons and your festivals,” he would have a point. What G’d  hated were the festivals introduced by King Jerobam which were meant to supplant the festivals described in the Torah here. We have been told in Kings I 12,32 that King Jerobam introduced a festival in the eighth month (to supplant Sukkot in the seventh month), a month he had chosen of his own will (verse 34).
    Furthermore, it is written in verse 38 of our chapter “apart from the Sabbaths days of the Lord,, etc.” The repetition of the word אלה, “ these,” in verse 37 of our chapter plus the word מלבד in verse 38 are the Torah’s way of saying that no other festivals are to be considered as “G’d’s” festivals. The ones listed in our portion will never be abolished; this is why they are called “G’d’s festivals.” Concerning these festivals the psalmist said in Psalms 111,8: “they are well-founded for all eternity, wrought of truth and equity.”
 	אשר תקראו אותם, “which you will proclaim.” The word  meaning “them” is spelled without the letter ו, so that it may be understood as אתם, “you,” i.e. you will determine when to proclaim the proper time for these festivals. Our sages in Rosh Hashanah 25 use this textual nuance to derive the authority of the Sanhedrin to rearrange the calendar in such a way that the festivals occur in the seasons determined by the Torah although if we were to follow the strictly lunar calendar this would prove utterly impossible. The authority of the Supreme Court in these matters is so great that even if they hand down an astronomically incorrect decision the decision is not revoked (Rosh Hashanah 25). The sages found an additional verse in Exodus 12,2 where the Torah wrote: “this month is for you,” as proof  that G’d granted authority לכם, “to you,” i.e. to your leaders to determine the precise time when a new moon is to be declared (compare Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer chapter 8). The author there writes: “the universe [i.e. sun and the moon in their orbits to make the concept of time and a calendar meaningful Ed.] was created starting with the 28th day in Ellul. G’d was forced to make an adjustment to the commencement of the New Year [seeing that the 28th of Ellul was simultaneously the fourth day of creation so that Adam was created on the thirtieth of that month. Ed.] at which time He handed over the calendar manipulations to Adam. This is the
 meaning of the words זה ספר תולדות אדם, “this is the book of the descendants of Adam” (authority derived by man from the Lord) in Genesis 5,1. Adam passed on this authority to Chanoch as we know from Genesis 5,24 that “Chanoch walked with G’d.” Chanoch in turn passed on this authority to Shem, son of Noach. (According to P.d. R. Eliezer, Chanoch passed it on to Noach and Noach passed it on to Shem). Shem passed on this authority to tamper with the calendar to Avraham who in turn passed it on to Yitzchak who in turn passed it on to Yaakov where it remained until the latter left the land of Israel and descended to Egypt. While the Israelites were in Egypt they did not have the authority to tamper with the calendar. This is why Exodus 12,1 introduced a new chapter in Jewish history; this is also why the Torah stressed that the directives given there were given בארץ מצרים, “in the land of Egypt,” something that we would have known as the Israelites were in Egypt at the time.
    The word לאמור In Exodus 12,1 meant that G’d said to Moses that up until that time (since the descent to Egypt) He had kept the secret of how to make these calculations to Himself, whereas at that point in time He was releasing this information. As long as the Jewish people lived in the land of Israel they exercised this authority adding an extra month from time to time to bring the seasons into harmony with the lunar calendar, and to compensate for the fact that the moon’s orbit was 29 days and a fraction of the thirtieth day so that the month had to have either 29 or thirty days.
    When most of the Jewish people were exiled to Babylon or went to Egypt, the calendar manipulation was taken care of the by the few Jews remaining in the Holy Land. When the prophet Ezekiel requested permission from G‘d to perform this task in Babylon, G’d told him that no one was permitted to perform this task except within the Holy Land. This prompted the sages to establish the rule that whereas the wise men and righteous people in the diaspora do not have the authority to tamper with the calendar, even herdsmen in the land of Israel do have such authority. Even prophets outside the land of Israel lack this authority whereas laymen inside of the land of Israel do have the authority to adjust the calendar. Only when no Jew remained in the land of Israel did they begin to adjust the calendar in Babylon. As soon as Ezra moved to the land of Israel they began to adjust the calendar there, and when Ezekiel asked permission to do this in Babylon G’d told him (Ezekiel 36,17) that it was the exclusive prerogative of the people living in Israel, i.e. בית ישראל יושבים על אדמתם. [I have quoted more from P.d.R. E. than the author, though not all. One of the most interesting things there is that it dates the move of Ezra to the land of Israel as far earlier than other traditional sources. Ed.]
    Something about the details of the procedure of adding an extra month to the year (still from P.d.R.E.): They would bring a Torah scroll, form a (semi)-circle where the elders would be seated in order of their seniority. They would then face with their faces to the ground, rise and remain standing, extend the palms of their hands toward heaven. The most senior member of the assembly would pronounce the Ineffable Name (as part of the appropriate benediction to be recited) and a heavenly echo would be heard and confirm the authority of those assembled to proceed by reciting the verse in Exodus 12,1. If the respective generation were lacking in merits no heavenly echo would be heard. 
    People who were present at the time the heavenly echo was heard were extremely fortunate as we know from Psalms 89,16 “hail to the nation who understand the meaning of the blast of the teruah, they walk in the light of Your presence O Lord.” This was an allusion to the people (performing this ceremony) enjoying G’d’s approval. Thus far (more or less) Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer. This is proof of the preference G’d accorded to the soil of the land of Israel and how dear it is to the Lord. We also have a quotation from the Jerusalem Talmud Sanhedrin 1,2 where the words from Jeremiah 29,1 אל יתר זקני הגולה ordinarily translated as “to the remainder of the elders in the diaspora,” are understood to mean that “the prophet spoke to the most distinguished people of the diaspora (יתר=יותר); He said that a small band of Jews in the land of Israel is dearer to Me (G’d) than the elders of the Supreme Court (and their accumulated wisdom) in the diaspora, wherever that may be.” When the elders of the Sanhedrin used to assemble (in anticipation of the new moon) in the office near the Sanctuary called לשכת הגזית they used to intone the formula מקודש, “it has been sanctified” three times after the testimony of witnesses claiming they had seen the new moon had been accepted. This day then was accepted in the celestial regions as the new moon. G’d would sit in judgment of people on New Year (which was also new moon) in accordance with the determination made on earth. Concerning this acceptance by the heavenly court of calendar decisions made by the Sanhedrin on earth, Psalms 57,3 writes אקרא לאלוקים עליון לאל גומר עלי, “I call to G’d Most High, to G’d Who is good to me.” David acknowledged that G’d agreed with him. In Midrash Tehillim chapter 4 the verse selected to reflect the same idea is Deut. 4,7 כה' אלוקינו בכל קראנו אליו, “like the Lord our G’d whenever we call upon Him.” Rabbi Oshiyah said that there is no other nation which sets rules for its G’d as does the Jewish nation. As an example consider the matter of calendar manipulation. When the elders of the people sit down to determine that the beginning of the new year has to be deferred by a month G’d agrees with their decision and says that whatever Israel has decided is in order. Concerning this matter David said: “I call on the Supreme G’d and He agrees with me.” When is this matter effective? On New Year’s. When the Sanhedrin sit down to proclaim a certain day as the beginning of the new year G’d adapts Himself to this decision calling together His Supreme Court consisting of the requisite number of angels, saying to them: “go and check what the Sanhedrin on earth has decided.” When the angels report that the Sanhedrin on earth has decided that New Year’s day is to be on a certain day. G’d assembles His court on that day to sit in judgment of mankind. This is the meaning of Psalms 47,6 “G’d ascends amid the sound of the teruah.” Immediately after that the angels make all the appropriate arrangements for the celestial court to begin its deliberations. This is the meaning of Daniel 7,9: “I watched till thrones were set up and the Ancient of days (G’d) sat down. His garment white as snow, etc. etc.” Some of the angels acted as defenders of the Jewish people whereas others acted as accusers. All of this was initiated by the decision of the Sanhedrin as confirmed by the psalmist  in Psalms 81,5 that “it is a law made by Israel, a ruling of the G’d of Yaakov.” The meaning of this line is that Israel decrees a law concerning Rosh Hashanah and G’d abides by Israel’s decision. Another proof that this is so can be derived from Numbers 29,1 יום תרועה יהיה לכם, “it will be your Day of Teruah,” i.e. you decide on the exact date. Whereas on other festivals the Torah describes these days as לה', “for the Lord,” in this instance the Torah describes the day as לכם, “for you, yours.” We also have the verse in our chapter (verse 4) “these are the festivals of the Lord which you will proclaim.” It is as if G’d said: “I have no festivals unless you have fixed the one which is yours.” All the other festivals are the Lord’s, whereas Rosh Hashanah is yours seeing you set the date. The word קראנו in Deut. 4,7 which we mentioned earlier is a reference to “what we proclaimed,” i.e the date the Sanhedrin decided. Thus far the Midrash Tehillim. 
    
    23,11. ממחרת השבת יניפנה הכהן, “from the day following the rest day the Priest shall wave it.” The word שבת In this verse does not refer to the שבת בראשית, the fixed Sabbath, the one which recurs every week, but to the first day of the Passover festival on which the performance of work is prohibited. This is also the way Onkelos understands the word when he writes: מבתר יומא טובא, “the day after the festival,” i.e. the day following the 15th of Nissan. The Torah prohibited eating from the new barley harvest until the 16th day of Nissan. This is the meaning of the line: “you shall not eat bread or roasted kernels or plump kernels until this very day, an eternal statute applicable to all your dwellings”(verse 14). This means that the prohibition to eat from the new barley harvest applies as a Biblical prohibition even outside the boundaries of the land of Israel throughout the ages (Compare Kidushin 37). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish states that there are three commandments which though primarily linked with our living in the Holy Land, also apply in the Diaspora. They are חדש-כלאים- ערלה, the prohibition listed here, the prohibition of cross breeding, and the prohibition of eating of the fruit of a tree during the first three years of its existence. The prohibition listed here is Biblical, whereas ערלה is known as decreed by Moses at Sinai, i.e. not derived through exegesis but through tradition, a decree of the sages effective since the time the Torah was given. The prohibition of cross breeding in its application outside the boundaries of the land of Israel is of later origin, a Rabbinical decree. (compare Sifra Emor 10,11).
    
    23,15. וספרתם לכם, “count for yourselves, etc.” The construction of וספרתם לכם is similar to that of ולקחתם לכם, “take for yourselves” in verse 40. It means that each individual is to count, i.e. buy the four species of plants for Tabernacles. Counting has to be by mouth, not merely in one’s mind (Menachot 68). This is a different manner of counting from that which the Torah mentioned in connection with a woman who has to count seven days before ritual immersion (Leviticus 15,13 and similar). In that instance the Torah means that one must not forget to keep track of time. It would be adequate to note the dates on the calendar, etc., without mouthing the days each morning or evening. Not only that, in those instances if a woman decides not to immerse herself in a ritual bath and remain ritually impure she is at liberty to do so (with all the restrictions which this would impose upon her). The most important aspect of the commandment to count in our verse is that one must begin the count on the 16th of the month of Nissan. This is the first day of the reaping of the barley harvest. The first cut barley (of good grade) is offered as a communal offering as a gift to the Lord as described in verses 12-13. The number 50 (of counting) comes to an end with the harvesting of the first wheat from which again an offering is brought in the form of two loaves of bread which are baked as leavened loaves (as spelled out in verses 18-20). The principal part of the whole commandment is the ritual of the offering of these two loaves. The accompanying animal sacrifices were precisely that, they did not constitute the principal part of the combined offerings. If, for some reason, no new wheat was available on that date the accompanying animal sacrifices mentioned here would not be offered.
    The word חדשה, ”new,” which the Torah writes describing this gift-offering of two loaves of bread from the new wheat harvest which is to be brought on the fiftieth day of the count, constitutes the festival of Shavuot. When giving further details of this counting etc., the Torah adds that it is to be an “eternal statute in all your dwellings” (verse 14). Seeing that the performance of the Omer sacrifice is dependent on the subsequent offering of the two loaves on the Shavuot festival, it would have been easy to imagine that in the absence of a Temple where the latter could be offered, the former, i.e. the “count-down” would also become redundant; therefore the Torah had to write that this applies throughout the generations in all our dwellings, as distinct from “in your dwellings” (verse 17) which is the Torah’s wording for the applicability of the offering of the two loaves. Not only the counting but also the accompanying prohibition of eating from the new barley prior to the beginning of the count-down is applicable nowadays also. The commandment not to perform work on the Shavuot festival is also in effect just as it was when the Temple was standing, although the only commandment which dis- tinguishes that festival cannot be performed in our time. The common denominator of all the festivals listed in the Torah is that they apply both in the land of Israel and in the Diaspora and both when the Temple is standing and when it is not. If the Torah saw fit to emphasise that the Day of Atonement remains in effect throughout the earth and regardless of whether the Temple is standing, this  may be due to the fact that our atonement is linked to the sacrifices offered on that day. Seeing we are not able to offer these sacrifices while we are in exile, we might have assumed that the day has lost its sanctity. The Torah therefore makes clear that the sacrifices are not the condition for the effectiveness of the Day of Atonement. In our portion the words “an eternal statute in all your dwellings” are not mentioned in connection with Passover, seeing this has already been mentioned in Exodus 12,14,17, where the Torah speaks of the consumption of unleavened bread and bitter herbs. Seeing that these parts of the ritual can be performed without the Temple, the Torah there had to spell this out. This is the commentary of Nachmanides on the Torah omitting the words “an eternal statute in all your dwellings” in connection with Passover in this portion.
    
    23,16. עד ממחרת השבת השביעית תספרו, “until the day after the seventh week you shall count.”  You are aware already that the count extends only for 49 days. Therefore, the tone-sign under the word תספרו does not link the word to חמישים, “fifty” which follows it, but the word חמישים belongs to the word והקרבתם, “you shall offer a sacrifice,” which follows it. Forty-nine days are spent counting whereas the fiftieth day is spent offering the gift-offering of the two loaves of the new wheat and the animal offerings accompanying them. The Torah did not mention the Shavuot festival independently as it did with all the other festivals. We could have expected the Torah to write: בחודש השלישי בששי לחודש חג השבועות, “in the third month on the sixth of the month is the Shavuot festival,” just as it did with the other festivals. Seeing that the Torah did not refer to the festival Shavuot in that manner makes it plain that it is considered as a festival which is linked to the Passover, i.e. it completes what commenced on Passover and now that we have counted forty-nine days from the second day of Passover the time has come to celebrate the Shavuot festival. Looking at it from a spiritual point of view, the days between the last day of the Passover festival and the festival of Shavuot may be considered as somewhat like חול המועד, the intermediate days of the Passover and Sukkot festivals respectively.
    
    23,18. אשה ריח ניחוח לה', “a fire-offering, of sweet-smelling fragrance to the Lord.” The Torah adds that a male goat is to be offered as a sin-offering (verse 19). We need to understand  why in addition to the animals described as אשה ריח ניחוח there was also a need for a sin-offering. This is especially important as in Numbers 28,26 where the offerings of all the festivals are listed there is no mention made of this male goat as a sin-offering in connection with the offerings listed as being brought on Shavuot. The sacrifice mentioned in Parshat Pinchas was addressed directly to the highest attribute of G’d, to Hashem, whereas the sacrifices mentioned here were addressed in the first instance to the Shechinah, (and to Hashem as the ultimate address). You will find that in Pinchas the word לה' is mentioned prior to the details of the offering being given, whereas here the Torah uses the reverse procedure, mentioning the word only after most of the animals have been mentioned. Here the Torah wished to include an allusion to an historical event which occurred on the first Shavuot, i.e. the revelation at Mount Sinai. At that time the Israelites experienced this revelation as a manifestation of the mountain burning, etc., i.e. as “fire.” Hence the emphasis here on the words אשה לריח ניחוח לה' as a reminder of that fiery experience. Also, in connection with the inauguration of the Tabernacle the Israelites experienced a vision of the כבוד ה', (Exodus 40, 34-35 where this is mentioned twice) similar to an experience they had seen at the revelation. We find that the prophet Isaiah refers to a manifestation of such glory, תפארת, in (Isaiah 64,10) in connection with the Temple. He calls it תפארת. Whenever the word עצרת occurs it refers to the manifestation of the Shechinah. The Temple was a permanent manifestation of this attribute. This concept is anchored in the Torah’s instruction that three times a year יראה כל זכורך, “all of your males shall be seen in the presence of the Lord, etc.” (Exodus 23,17), an allusion to the fact that there is an attribute of the Lord, i.e. the כבוד, also known as Shechinah, before whom these males are to appear. On the other hand, on the occasion of the day we know as שמיני העצרת, the day following the Sukkot festival, no mention is made of this אשה, fire-offering; the reason is that on that occasion no pilgrimage occurred, i.e. the Israelites did not separately fulfill the commandment of appearing before the Lord at the Temple. 
    
    23,22. ובקצרכם, “when you harvest, etc.” The reason the word קצר occurs twice in this verse is to teach that failure to observe the statute laid down here makes one guilty of two separate violations. Rabbi Avdimi son of Rabbi Yossi, asked: “why did the Torah see fit to mention this legislation of leaving the corner of one’s field for the poor in the middle of the paragraphs detailing the festivals so that Passover and Shavuot are before this legislation and Rosh Hashanah, Yom Hakippurim and Sukkot after it?” It is to teach that anyone who observed this legislation properly is considered as if he personally had built the Temple and offered sacrificial offerings in it. This is why the paragraph concludes with the words אני ה' אלוקיכם, “I am the Lord your G’d” (and can be depended upon to reward you for your performance of these commandments). 
    
    23,24. זכרון תרועה, “a remembrance with the blast of the Teruah.” On that day we are to recite verses which mention the blowing of the shofar and verses in which G’d is mentioned as remembering Israel. We are to remind the Lord of Yitzchak who was prepared to give his life for Him and in whose place the ram which had got entangled by his horns was offered up instead (Genesis 22,13).
    The Torah here does not mention whether this remembrance is to occur by means of the blast of the Teruah sound with the trumpet or with the shofar; besides we do not understand the significance of that sound in this connection. Moreover, the Torah does not reveal at this point that the date mentioned, i.e. the first day of the seventh month, is the Day of Judgment. All the Torah reveals here is that there is a work-prohibition similar to that of the Sabbath on that day, that it is a holy convocation. Clearly, the details of this legislation have been revealed only orally, Moses telling our sages. They have a tradition that the Teruah´s sound which the Torah speaks of is to be emitted by a shofar. The linkage to the written Torah is established via the Teruah sound blown by a shofar which is mentioned in connection with the Jubilee year (compare Rosh Hashanah 34).The fact that this is the date of the Day of Judgment is alluded to by the word זכרון, i.e. the day when G’d remembers all of man’s deeds of the previous year. The word זכרון occurs in connection with judgment also elsewhere. One such example is Numbers 5,15 מזכרת עון, “a remembrance of guilt. Another example is found in Ezekiel 21,28: והוא מזכיר עון להתפש, “and it shall serve to recall their guilt.” The word פקד also means “to remember,” and occurs in connection with sin being remembered such as in Exodus 20,5 פוקד עון אבות, “who recalls the guilt of the parents, etc.;” our sages in Rosh Hashanah 32 state explicitly that פקדונות הרי הן כזכרונות, the former word means the same as the latter word זכרונות. In other words, there are adequate hints in our verse that the day mentioned is the Day of Judgment. On that day it is appropriate for us to listen to the sound of the teruah blown on the shofar as stipulated by our sages.
    The reason that the wording of this paragraph is more enigmatic than any other paragraph dealing with the festivals is that it deals with fundamental aspects of our religion. You will find that the more mystical the subject matter the Torah deals with the more enigmatic does the written Torah verbalise this. Take as an example the commandment to put on phylacteries. The only few words that we find about this in the written Torah is the verse in Exodus 13,16 והיו לאות על ידיך ולטוטפות בין עיניך “they (the phylacteries) shall be as a sign on your hand and as a symbol on your forehead.” Were it not for our oral tradition we would not have the faintest idea what these phylacteries should be made of, what they should contain, what colour they should be, etc., etc.  We would not even be sure what parts of the body exactly these phylacteries should be worn on. We have a similar problem with the commandment of ציצית, the fringes to be worn at the corners of four-cornered  garments. The written Torah is very sparse with its information although our sages describe the commandment as equal in weight to all the other commandments combined (Menachot 43). Without the oral tradition we would not have known that each fringe is to consist of eight twisted threads, and that there were to be five knots on each of the eight threads.
    So here too, the first of the ten days which is to conclude with the Day of Atonement on the tenth of that month. There are numerous hidden aspects which have not been spelled out in the written text. One of the mystical aspects of the legislation is that nowhere does the Torah spell out matters relevant directly to the soul. The very fact that such a world of souls exists is only hinted at, never mentioned explicitly. The reason is simple. The written Torah was given to the multitude of the people, women and children alike. It was to be the property of all of them equally. It certainly would not have been appropriate for G’d to write in it matters which many people could not understand. The people as a whole do not have a clear understanding of the world of abstract beings such as souls. Even many individuals who have engaged in the study of the Torah experience great difficulty in understanding such concepts. We may compare this to the inability of a fish whose habitat is water to have an appreciation of the conditions of life prevailing on dry land. A fish familiar only with water, the element it is at home in, has no understanding of the element of fire, the very opposite of the element which it knows. Similarly, the world of the souls, the world in which there are only disembodied creatures are not within the range of what people who live in a physical universe can understand. As long as man is composed both of matter and an abstract soul which is attached  to his body, he cannot have a clear understanding of the goings on in that other world. This is why the written Torah had to explain objectives to be attained by human beings so that they could be perceived with the physical eye in order to prepare man for an intellectual transition to a world he had not experienced with his five senses, a world which nevertheless represents the target, i.e. ultimate home for which man is destined.
    A Midrashic approach based on Vayikra Rabbah 29,7 understands the verse in terms of the patriarchs, suggesting that G’d is telling us that if we want to be found deserving when examined by G’d, our relationship to our patriarchs is the key. The words באחד לחודש is reminiscent of Avraham who was one of a kind as we know from Ezekiel 33,24 אחד היה אברהם, “Avraham was only one man.” The words זכרון תרועה are a reference to Yitzchak, whereas the words מקרא קודש, “a holy convocation,” are a reference to Yaakov. What the Midrash means is that the shofar blasts of Rosh Hashanah, i.e. the blasts of the teruah, are an allusion to certain attributes. Just as the attribute of fear pervading the celestial regions is surrounded by the attribute of Mercy, so our teruah sounds which are fear-inspiring are preceded and followed by the sounds known as tekiah,  to parallel what occurs in heaven. Were this not so the earth would collapse completely as soon as G’d would commence sitting in judgment of mankind. If we would only blow the תרועה sounds this would be heresy of the first order, [i.e. as if we denied the presence of the attribute of Mercy. Ed.] Keeping this in mind we can understand that what is written here means that the Day of Judgment is the Day of the Teruah which is surrounded by the attribute of Mercy, called here זכרון. Having understood this it follows that the meaning of the words זכרון תרועה is equivalent to שופר תרועה and יום תרועה (compare 25,9 and Numbers 29,1 respectively).
    23,27. אך בעשור לחודש  הזה, “However, on the tenth of this month, etc.” According to the plain meaning of the text G’d says that whereas on the first day of the month, the Day of Judgment each one of you passes in front of Me like a flock of sheep, the tenth day of this month is the Day of Atonement, the day on which the decree penciled in on the Day of Judgment will be signed and sealed.
    A Midrashic approach based on Sifra Emor 14,12: whenever the Torah writes the words אך or רק, these words are meant to exclude something otherwise included. In this instance the meaning is that the ability of the Day of Atonement to forgive our sins is dependent on our sincere repentance. People who do not repent their sins do not have them forgiven in spite of having lived to this date and beyond it. The first of the month which is a Day of Judgment is applicable both to repentant sinners and those who do not repent. However, i.e. אך, the Day of Atonement and its benefits apply only to those who have repented.
    
    23,28. וכל מלאכה לא תעשו בעצם היום הזה כי יום כפורים הוא, “and you must not perform any work on this day for it is a Day of Atonement.”  The reason the Torah speaks of atonement and of עצם היום “the essence of this day,” is that without these words we could have thought that when no Temple is standing and the sacrifices appropriate for that day cannot be offered that we also forfeit its benefits, i.e. forgiveness. Therefore the Torah added these words to reassure us.
    
    23,39. אך בחמשה עשר יום לחודש השביעי באספכם, “however, on the fifteenth day of the seventh month when you gather in, etc.” We are entitled to ask at this point that seeing the Torah told us already earlier in verse 34 that the Sukkot festival commences on that date, why repeat the date? However, it is the style of the written Torah when lengthy matters are discussed to re-insert the date after an interruption so that we should not forget that we still speak of the same date mentioned earlier in the same paragraph. I would add here that earlier in the paragraph the date seemed to relate to the offering of certain sacrifices, i.e. a procedure directed at G’d, stressing the element of “a holy convocation,” whereas what is discussed here are procedures aimed at our terrestrial universe and our gratitude for the harvest. Seeing that the taking of the palm frond is also an act of rehabilitation on behalf of our ancestor Adam who had sinned by abusing a plant G’d had had planted in Gan Eden, by reiterating the date mentioned in connection with the sacrifices offered on this festival being the same as that on which we take the palm frond, this shows that the taking of the lulav has a two-tiered significance. Apart from symbolising gratitude for the harvest being gathered in it also has an independent spiritual significance. This is further reinforced  (verse 40) by the formula ולקחתם לכם, “take for you (r spiritual rehabilitation).”
    
    23,40. ולקחתם לכם ביום הראשון פרי עץ הדר כפת תמרים וענף עץ עבות וערבי נחל, “take for yourselves on the first day the fruit of the tree hadar, branches of a date-palm, twigs of a tree surrounded by leaves and willow branches.” According to the plain meaning of the text all of these four plants grow near water and require to be irrigated by water more than other fruit or plants. This is why at this time when we offer special water libations on the Altar we take representatives of these plants to invoke G’d’s special blessing for their growth. This festival is the one when the annual rainfall for the land of Israel is determined (Rosh Hashanah 16). Presentation of these four plants will ensure that G’d looks upon us with favour at that time. Our sages in Sukkah 34 have a tradition that we are to take one etrog (citron), one palm frond, 3 myrtle branches, and two willow branches.
    It is possible to see these numbers reflected in the text of our verse. The fact that only one etrog is to be taken is reflected in the word פרי of the sequence פרי עץ הדר being in the singular. This reflects what the Talmud said that we are to take “one fruit, not two.” Similarly, the wording כפת עץ תמרים, where the word כפת is spelled without the letter ו which is the way we read it, i.e. as if it were in the plural. Strictly speaking, the Torah should have written כף תמר instead of כפת מרים if only one single palm frond was meant. However, the Torah had to use this wording so that we would not think that a single leaf of the palm would have been sufficient. Therefore, by writing the word in the plural while spelling it as if it were in the singular the Torah gets its point across that we are to take a palm branch consisting of numerous leaves. The reason that the word תמרים is in the plural instead of תמר, seeing we take only the branch of one palm tree, is that palm trees are male and female and cannot produce fruit unless the female palm has received pollen from the male palm. In other words, one single palm is by definition only half a palm at best from the point of view of it bearing fruit. You cannot plant an orchard of male palms only or female palms only unless the opposite gender is nearby. According to the author all plants require both male and female strains in order to reproduce and even certain gemstones are subject  to similar conditions.
    
    The reason that we find the number 3 for the myrtle branches alluded to in the text is the wording וענף עץ עבות. The word ענף refers to one, the word עבות in the plural means a minimum of two; as a result there have to be no less than three such branches. This allusion is not referred to in the Talmud, only in commentators such as Rashi on Sukkah 34. The word ענף in this instance means that the stalk is surrounded, covered, with leaves of that plant. If the stalk were not surrounded by leaves it would have to be referred to as עץ, ”tree,” instead of as ענף, “branch.” Seeing the Torah speaks of ענף עץ וגו', clearly ענף and עץ are quite different from one another. The term עץ can be applied to branches not covered by leaves even if, as in the case of the myrtle branch, the required minimum height is only about 40 centimeters (שלשה טפחים). The word עבות in our verse refers back to the number of leaves that are to grow at each level of that branch, i.e. the preferred quality of the plant is a variety where three leaves surround the branch at each level, the top of the leaves reaching the bottom of the next layer of leaves. This requirement is not mandatory but is suggested to people who want to fulfill the commandment of the four species of plants in the best possible fashion. As far as the Biblical requirement is concerned, as long as there are three moist leaves on the stalk the myrtle branch may be used (Sukkah 33). The minimum requirement is for each of the three stalks to have one good leaf at the top. At any rate we have shown that the wording of the verse alludes to the requirement of there being three such stalks of the myrtle tree. Furthermore, the origin of the halachic requirement that these three leaves should grow out of the same root is due to the spelling of the word עבת which, seeing it is in the plural, should really have been written with the letter ו following the letter ב, i.e. עבות. [The latter interpretation is that of Rashi, strenuously opposed by Tossaphot as too stringent a require- ment, see Sukkah 32 and Rabbi Chavell’s comment]
    There are to be two branches of the willow tree; this is clear from the plural wording ערבי נחל. The minimum number possible to comply with the description ערבות, “willows” is two.
    A Midrashic approach based on Vayikra Rabbah 30,10: the words פרי עץ הדר are a reference to Avraham. The words כפת תמרים are a reference to Yitzchak, whereas the words ענף עץ עבות are a reference to Yaakov. The words ערבי נחל are a reference to Joseph. We need to understand this Midrash along the following lines: The Torah mentioned the word פרי, i.e. fruit in the singular thereby hinting that it was Avraham who paved the way for recognition of G’d as the “One” and only Creator. He spread the idea, i.e. his words bore fruit. The Torah cites proof of  this at the beginning of Parshat Lech Lecha (Genesis 12, 5) crediting both Avram and Sarai with having “made” נפש souls, i.e. converting people to monotheism already while they were in Charan and before they moved to the land of Canaan. Furthermore, as we already mentioned, Avraham is referred to in Ezekiel 33,24 as אחד היה אברהם, “unique was Avraham, singular.”
    The word עץ, tree, in our verse of פרי עץ הדר refers to a unique feature about Avraham. Just as a tree stops giving fruit when there was no supply of water for its roots but is able to revive itself when provided with water, so Avraham, who had despaired of producing biological offspring and had “dried out,” was rejuvenated and sired a son at one hundred years of age. This is part of what the sages (Baba Metzia 86) had in mind that until the advent of Avraham the concept of old age was unknown. People had not been able to distinguish father and son from their exterior appearance as they looked as if both were of the same age. Avraham was granted the appearance of “old age,” so that henceforth one could distinguish (and honour) the aged on the basis of their appearance even if one did not know the individual in question personally. This is what the Torah (Genesis 24,1) had in mind when it wrote: ואברהם זקן בא בימים, “Avraham had become aged, advanced in years.” We have another verse in Proverbs 20,29 where Solomon elaborates on what the Torah wrote about Avraham. He says: והדר זקנים שיבה, “the majesty of old men is their gray hair.” 
    The words כפות תמרים refer to Yitzchak seeing he had been bound, כפות, (on the altar). The word תמרים is related to תימרות עשן, “columns of smoke,” mentioned in Song of Songs 3,6 i.e. an allusion to the smoke rising from the remains of the sacrificial animal. He has always been compared to an “unblemished burnt-offering” in our history.
    The words ענף עץ עבות are a reference to Yaakov; just as the stem of the myrtle is surrounded by leaves, so Yaakov was surrounded by his sons, the twelve tribes .
    The words ערבי נחל refer to Joseph. Just as a willow, after a period of being full of juices shrivels and dries out, so Joseph after a brilliant youth as second in command to Pharaoh the mightiest King of his time, experienced the loss of his legendary father, losing the source of his inspiration. He “dried out,” i.e. he died earlier than his brothers who were senior to him in years. The point that the Midrash wants to make is that when we perform the commandment of taking the four species of plants and waving them in all directions we should remind G’d of the merit of these patriarchs so that their merit will assist us in securing the beneficial rainfall required for the year which has just commenced. Even Moses used to preface his prayers by asking G’d to remember the merits of the patriarchs, such as in Exodus 32,13.
    Another exegesis about the four species based on a similar line of approach sees in the four species symbols of four organs of our bodies which between them account for most of man’s activities. They are: the eyes and the heart, as we know form our sages in the Jerusalem Talmud Berachot 1,8 “the heart and the eyes are the two principal agents of sin,” as the Torah already warned us in Numbers 15,39: “do not follow the dictates of your heart and your eyes!” The third organ are the lips which also account for the performance of many of the commandments as well as for the commission of many sins. The fourth part of the body accounting for a great many of our activities is the spine, a central part of our bodies. The activities performed by means of the spine originate in the brain whence directions are issued which are carried out by the spine. Concerning all this the sages in Vayikra Rabbah 30,14 said that the etrog symbolises man’s heart, the lulav symbolises his spine; the myrtle symbolises his eyes, and the willow symbolises man’s lips. What the Midrash means is that when man gets involved in sins which were committed with one of the four organs listed he needs to atone for them by means of the respective one of the four species we wave on the Sukkot festival. The Midrash bases this on the principle we discussed in connection with desecrating the holy Name of the Lord (page 1784) that sins may be neutralised by the performance of commandments corresponding in some measure to the sin one has committed. We have a statement in Baba Batra 4 that when King Herod who had murdered tens of thousands of Jews asked Shimon ben Shetach if there was some way in which he could expiate for this, he was told that there was a way he could do this if he were to build (renovate) the Temple. The underlying consideration was that he who extinguished the light of the earth through murdering many people (including all the members of the Sanhedrin, the elite of the Jewish people), would have to provide light for the world in order to compensate for the darkness which he had caused previously. It is most reassuring to know that there are ways to compensate for wrongs we have committed and offsetting them by the performance of certain commandments with the express intention of expiating for corresponding sins.
    Concerning the commandment involving the lulav which represents man’s spine, David said in Psalms 35,10: “all my bones shall say; ‘Lord who is like You?’” Yet another Midrash found in Vayikra Rabbah 30,12 comments on the words פרי עץ הדר by saying that the reason the etrog  tree is called הדר, is that it is the epitome of beauty in that it dispenses fruit, good taste, and a pleasant fragrance. The species listed next to it in the Torah, i.e. the lulav, the palm frond, while not providing us with its fragrance does yield fruit. The third species listed in the Torah, the myrtle, while giving off a pleasant fragrance does not provide us with any fruit. Finally, the willow is a plant which does not offer us either fruit or fragrance. The etrog is taken to represent the righteous person who is both a scholar and performs deeds of loving kindness and observes the commandments. The lulav represents the Torah scholars (fruit) who do not however, excel in the performance of good deeds. The third plant, the myrtle is symbolic of people who do perform good deeds (fragrance) but who have not acquired a proficiency in Torah. Finally, the last plant, the willow, represents the Jews who have neither Torah knowledge nor good deeds to their credit. G’d said here: ‘let them all come and form one bunch in My presence and I will pardon them for all their sins.”
    We find a similar approach expressed by our sages when they examined the eleven spices which made up the incense offered in the Temple both mornings and evenings. The function of the incense was, of course, to provide a pleasant fragrance and for this purpose the Torah listed 11 different ingredients as well as the proportion in which these were to be mixed. Nonetheless, one of these ingredients is evil-smelling, not adding but detracting from the overall fragrance. The ingredient is known as חלבנה, galbanum. We have it on the authority of Keritot 6 that by itself this galbanum was exuding a bad smell. According to our sages there the reason that G’d wanted this ingredient to be part of the incense was to symbolise the fact that when sinners are part of a group of righteous people and surrounded by them, the fragrance of the good deeds performed by the righteous will neutralise the evil smell exuded by the sinner. When this is the case, G’d will accept the repentance from both the righteous and the sinners, each for the sins they are guilty of.
    Another exegesis by our sages in connection with these four species of plants: they are an allusion to the four kingdoms which host the Jewish people in exile. The author of that Midrash says that the four species waved by the Jewish people on Sukkot atone for the sins which resulted in the four exiles which we have been subjected to, and performance of that commandment redeems us from the respective exiles. The etrog represents the Babylonian Empire. Just as the etrog is the colour of gold, so the Babylonians set much stock by gold. Daniel 2,38 describes King Nevuchadnezzar by addressing him as “the head of gold.” The second species, the palm frond of the date palm, is symbolic of the kingdom of the Medes (exile under Achashverosh). The lulav is a long branch of the tree; Haman was hung on a gallows (tree) fifty cubits high. The third species, the myrtle branches, are symbolic of the exile under the Greeks. Just as the myrtle branch gives the appearance of consisting of a variety of plaits, so the Greek Empire was composed of a variety of fabrics. (i.e. each province was allowed its own king). The fourth species, the willow branches represent the Roman Empire, our present exile. Just as the colour of the willow branch (stem) is red, the Roman Empire is perceived of as “red,” i.e. the kingdom descended from the “red one,” Esau. 
    Tanchuma Emor 20 in interpreting the somewhat enigmatic verse in Proverbs 30,18 that “four are amongst the things I do not know,” explains that Solomon speaks of the four species. [He meant that the significance of precisely the selection of these four plants as the ones with which we perform the commandment escaped him. Ed.] In Proverbs 30,24 Solomon adds the words: “four are the smallest of the world yet they are the wisest of the wise.” The Midrash understands these enigmatic comments to mean that although these four plants are seemingly some of the most insignificant phenomena on earth they are at the same time the most sophisticated, as by means of them the merits or demerits of people are deeply affected. They influence the decision made by the Creator regarding His creatures’ future lives. 
    Still another comment based on this type of approach: etrog and lulav respectively are an allusion to the reward we can expect for performance of G’d’s commandments both here on earth and in the world to come, respectively. The myrtle and the willow branch are symbols of different ways of repentance, submitting to painful affliction and humbling oneself. The fruit of the tree called hadar points to the reward received for the commandments performed in this world as the tree grows from year to year, (compare Sukkah 35, that the fruit does not fall off the tree if not harvested). The words כפות תמרים are an allusion to the reward for merits accumulated in this life in the world after death, seeing that the lulav is so much bigger than the etrog and we have been assured that the reward in this life equals only dividends as compared to the capital payable in the life in the future. The leaves of the lulav grow in an ever upwardly direction, reminiscent of the greater value of the rewards it represents being so much greater in the hereafter. Moreover, the date palm does not yield fruit till after seventy years, a clear indication that it symbolises man’s reaping the “fruits” of a meritorious life in the hereafter. The average life span of man is seventy years as we know from Psalms 90,10.
    The myrtle branches (leaves) contain some bitter ingredient although its fragrance is very sweet;  this is an allusion to the path of repentance containing painful episodes. Man is to afflict himself by means of fasting and self-flagellation. He who employs these means to assist in his path of repentance will ensure that his “fragrance” will waft heavenward. The willow branch  is an allusion to humility and self-deprecation; to symbolise this we do not find the willow growing in mountainous parts of the earth; it grows only near water, low-lying areas. This is to remind the repentant sinner to humble himself as a result of which he will achieve atonement and will be forgiven. In accordance with this whole approach it is appropriate that one holds the three species lulav, myrtle, and willow in the right hand in order to point at the great reward in store for us in the hereafter, the eternal life; by the same token, the etrog which symbolises reward for our good deeds in this world is to be held in our left hand. Traditionally, the “left” describes the terrestrial world, whereas the “right” symbolises the celestial regions in which our souls will dwell after they leave our bodies. This is the way the Talmud Shabbat 63 interprets Proverbs 3,16: “Length of days is in the right hand, in her left hand riches and honour.” The way our sages arrive at this interpretation is by saying that those people who do the “right” things deserve to enjoy eternal life; the ones who concentrate on subordinate values, i.e. “leftists,” will be rewarded only with material rewards such as riches and honour in this world.
    A rationalistic approach to the commandment of waving the four species on the Sukkot festival: The moisture of a fruit is its life; this is why we have been commanded that all these four plants should be הדר, in a prime state, fresh, full of their original moisture. By means of four such different categories of plants we are to perform a ritual symbolising life and remaining alive. This is why the common denominator of all of these four plants is that they are evergreens, i.e. do not “die” at the end of a season. They excel in this respect when compared to other plants. The Torah which we have been given at Mount Sinai is called ארח חיים, a path to  life. We, the recipients of the Torah are called “life,” as we know from Deut. 4,4: “and you who cleave to the Lord your G’d are all alive this day.” It is appropriate for us then at this time of year to take plants which represent life and acknowledge the fact that we have been inscribed for a year of life on the Day of Atonement just past. G’d Himself is also described as אלוקים חיים, the living G’d. What better way to exalt Him than with plants which symbolise the concept of life! If these plants had been dry they would not contain an allusion to life; it is their moisture which epitomises their life just as the blood in our veins proves that we are alive. No wonder then that we have been told in the Jerusalem Talmud Sukkah 3,1 that a dried out lulav is not suitable for use as one of the four species of plants as David has already said in Psalms 115,17: “it is not the dead who praise the Lord.” Dryness symbolises death; hence dried out plants cannot be used for this ritual.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words פרי עץ הדר refer to a fruit which is similar in characteristics to the attribute כבוד of the Lord, an attribute which comprises 32 paths. [The word לב, heart, as well as the word כבוד, “majesty” have a numerical value of 32. Ed.].The reason the tree is called הדר, beauiful, is because it is הדר מכל הדר, “the most beautiful of all the beautiful trees.” This is comparable to Song of Songs 6,10: ”Who is this that gazes down from atop the Temple Mount, brightening like the dawn, beautiful as the moon, brilliant as the sun?”
    The words כפות תמרים are a reference to the emanation called סוף הבנין, popularly known as יסוד, the head of the domain of all that pertains to the terrestrial world [immediately above the emanation מלכות, i.e. the domain in which we live, the world of עשיה. Ed.] The lulav symbolises the spine seeing it is straight and upright, an essential critical part of the body similar to the קו האמצעי in the diagram representing the emanations. The reason the Torah speaks of תמרים in the plural although only one palm frond is used is to avoid confusion with the meaning of the word תמר in the normal sense, i.e. the plant, such as in several verses referring to this comparison, for instance: זאת קומתך דמתה לתמר, “such is your stature, comparable to palm tree,” (Song of Songs 7,8), or צדיק כתמר יפרח, “the righteous flourishes just like a palm tree” (Psalms 92,13). So much for the meaning of תמרים. The word כפת spelled with the letter ו is to alert us to the fact that the word תמרים is only written in the plural to avoid confusion with the examples of the word mentioned, but that actually only one palm frond is meant. Etrog is symbolic of heart, the palm frond is equivalent to the heart of that tree.
    According to the Sefer Habahir item 176, the words ענף עץ עבות refer to the three emanations גדולה-גבורה-תפארת. This is an allusion to man whose two arms are used to protect his head. Between his head and his arms he has three protective organs.[ I suppose the head is an organ with which man can protect himself intellectually, whereas the arms are organs with which he protects himself physically. Ed.] The word ענף refers to the left arm, the word עבות to the right arm, so that the עץ, tree, is in the middle. The reason it is called עץ is because it represents the root of the tree.
    The הדס is similar to man’s eyes, whereas the ערבי נחל allude to the emanations נצח and הוד which are described as למודי ה'. The shape of the leaf of the willow branch is similar to the shape of lips. The prophets receive their prophetic inspiration from these emanations but not from anything higher than the seven emanations which we have listed as paralleling the four species. The very word ערבה is also the name of the seventh (highest) of the seven heaves known to us as ערבות from Psalms 68,5: סולו לרוכב בערבות, “extol Him Who rides the clouds.”
    In defining the meaning of ערבי נחל the author of the Sefer Habahir (Rabbi Nechunyah Hakanah) item 177 writes  that these 2 willow branches represent man’s thighs; the word נחל describes the place where all the seven plants forming the four species originate, [or which they represent allegorically. In a commentary on the Sefer Habahir I have found the word נחל as an abbreviation of the term נחלי אל, i.e. a description fitting all the seven emanations we have mentioned. If I understand it correctly the emanations are viewed as rivers of spiritual input originating with G’d, hence the term נחלי אל. Ed.] According to the author what he has written so far under this heading corresponds to the view of Nachmanides.
    An alternate kabbalistic interpretation considers that the ערבי נחל allude to the emanations גדולה וגבורה rather than to the emanations נצח והוד. Regardless of which set of allusions we accept the common denominator is that the four species which comprise seven plants allude between them to the seven lower emanations. The ערבה is the seventh in any event regardless of whether the emanation count commences with the highest or the lowest of the emanations. According to the combined views of the kabbalists the lulav and the other plants surrounding it form a total of seven units. Seeing that in the Talmud (Sukkah 45) the lulav symbolises the צדיק, the righteous person who grows straight like a palm and does not deviate to the right or to the left of the proper path, the sages have been more stringent in their requirements as to what constitutes a lulav fit for use and what does not. For instance, if the top of the lulav is lopped off it is unfit for use (Sukkah 29). On the other hand, if even three leaves of the myrtle branch are missing this does not disqualify the myrtle branch from performing its part in the four species halachically (Sukkah 34). The קטימה, lopping off of the top, is reminiscent of the word קציצה, “deliberate cutting off.” Seeing that the myrtle represents the emanations גדולה וגבורה, i.e. two emanations, if something is cut off from a plant which does not represent the concept of unity as does the lulav, this is reflected in the halachah that missing leaves or cut off leaves at the top do not disqualify it from use. [I have decided to curtail translation of the remainder of these details; the important thing is that our author uses existing halachah as reflecting the mystical concepts embodied in the entire legislation involving these four species. The reader is reminded that in most prayer books there is a paragraph to be recited before we utter the benediction prior to waving the lulav, etc., in which the reference to all the mystical aspects of this ritual is emphasised. Ed.]
    When considering all this we can understand the statement of our sages in Sukkah 45 that anyone who performs the command- ments of the four species and binding them together as prescribed is considered as if he personally had erected the Altar and offered a sacrifice upon it. They base this on Psalms 118,27: אסרו חג בעבותים עד קרנות המזבח, “bind the festive offering to the horns of the altar with strong cords.”
    Seeing that the etrog and lulav are symbols of the concepts of זכור and שמור respectively, one should hold the lulav in the right hand and the performance of the commandment is applicable only by day. The etrog is to be held in the left hand. The manner of waving these plants is as follows: we wave in the four directions of the wind, horizontally, followed by waving it upward and downward. Each “waving” is performed three times successively. This amounts to a total of 18 such wavings. This alludes to the three letters י-ה-ו in the tetragram which represent G’d’s seal on the universe, i.e. one seal in each of the six directions. Even though we do not find the number of these wavings spelled out in the Talmud Sukkah 37 where the only thing we are told is that one is to wave the species forward, backward, down and up, the details have been derived from other rituals involving such “waving.” When the Torah writes אשר הונף ואשר הורם in Exodus 29,27 the words אשר הונף refer to horizontal forward and backward motion whereas the words אשר הורם refer to raising and lowering (seeing you cannot raise unless you have previously lowered). This is a symbolic way of presenting these plants to the One who owns all these horizontal directions (or winds) of the globe. The raising and lowering is an acknowledge- ment that both heaven and earth belong to G’d. By doing all this we affirm our belief in the unity of G’d, that He never had any partner. Seeing that Adam, the first human being had become guilty of heresy by eating of the etrog (alone, without any other plant), we add the other species so that the etrog is treated as part of the fruits (plants) with which we acknowledge G’d, His uniqueness, His being the source of all blessings, etc. In this way we hope to put G’d in a frame of mind where He grants us grace. We have already referred to Tanchuma Emor 20 in connection with Proverbs 30,24 and shown how the Midrash views the mystique in the “four” items which Solomon did not understand as the fact that the four species really represent the number seven, and how that number seven symbolises the wisdom which we derive from the seven emanations below that of חכמה. Performing the ritual reinforces the spiritual power of these attributes (emanations).
    The Talmud Sukkah 38  quotes Rava as saying that just as it is generally important to fulfill the commandments in all its details so also the performance of the commandment of the lulav (and other species) in all its details has direct beneficial results. [He meant that if one waves the lulav only twice in each direction instead of three times one does not shortchange G’d, but oneself, as we do not know precisely which benefit is the result of which waving. Ed.] 
    Commenting on the precise nature of these “wavings,” Rabbeinu Chananel writes in his commentary on Sukkah 37: “how did this waving take place? He extends the lulav three times outward, brings it back, and extends it upwards followed by extending it downward. This is also the way Rabbeinu Hai gaon described the procedure. We have adopted the principle of this procedure from the Jerusalem Talmud where we are told that the wavings consists of repeating this procedure three times in each direction. Rabbi Zeyra queried whether waving forwards and backwards is not considered two wavings instead of merely one? The question remained unanswered. Seeing the question was not answered we adopt the more stringent possibility, i.e. that one waving consists of a motion which brings the species back to where the motion started.” Thus far the intelligible part of the author’s quotation of Rabbeinu Chananel.
    The reason that the sages insisted that the materials used to bind the species into one bunch (except for the etrog) must be of their kind, [not materials which could become contaminated or golden threads, etc., Ed.] is to emphasise that the whole 4 species represent only the seven emanations, etc.; any additional material used would negate the concept we are trying to convey.
    The reason that we loosen (at least) one of the loops woven around the lulav on the seventh day is a allusion to the קו האמצעי, which is the central line through the diagram of the emanations perceived as uniting what is on the right and what is on the left. We want to show that both the celestial forces (as represented by the highest three emanations) and the lower terrestrial forces are inseparably linked. Just as the leaves on the lulav cleave and adhere to the centre shaft of it, the שדרה, so everything in this whole universe is dependent on and must remain attached to the שדרה, of the diagram of the emanations. Seeing this is an important concept involving the significance of the seven emanations and the seven heavens, the seventh day of the festival is the one on which we draw attention to this symbolically, [as if to say that after having reached the seventh day these leaves remain attached without outside help. My words, Ed.]
    I have tried to derive some more messages by studying this commandment in detail and have come to the conclusion that there are both revealed as well as mystical dimensions to these species, just as there are revealed as well as mystical dimensions in the letters of the holy Name י-ה-ו-ה. The two revealed aspects of the legislation appear in their very names, i.e. כפות תמרים and ערבי נחל (their meaning is clear to the average reader). The two names which represent the mystical elements of the species are the words פרי עץ הדר and ענף עץ. These words contain so much mystery that without the help of our sages we would not have known that the plants referred to are the citron and the myrtle respectively. Similarly, when we contemplate the letters in the tetragram there are mystical and revealed aspects. The three letters י-ה-ו have both hidden and obvious meanings. Each of these letters though when written as a single letter has only half the numerical value it has when it is spelled as a word, such as the letter י has a numerical value of 10, whereas the same letter spelled as a word, i.e. יוד, has a numerical value of 20. The same ratio is true of the letter ה. When simply spelled as a letter its numerical value is 5, whereas when we spell the letter as a word i.e. הה, its numerical value doubles. The same is true of the third letter in the tetragram the letter ו. This suggests that when it comes to the Unity of the Lord, as expressed in His holy Name the revealed and the mystical are not at odds with one another. Each letter is in a fixed ratio to the other both in its revealed form and in its hidden form. This same concept, that there are obvious as well as mystical dimensions in the commandment of the four species, is reflected in the enigmatic way the Torah writes about the two species the etrog and the myrtle. May the good Lord open our eyes and enable us to understand the mysteries hinted at in the written text of the holy Torah. 
    
    
    
    23,43. כי בסכות הושבתי את בני ישראל, “for I have let the Children of Israel dwell in huts, etc.” Some of our sages understand the word סכות literally, i.e. booths, huts, whereas others understand it allegorically, meaning that the protective clouds of G’d acted for them as if they were dwelling in secure huts. According to the view of those who understand the word literally we have to assume that the people constructed the huts for themselves (as they certainly did not take prefabricated huts with them out of Egypt). As a remembrance of the Israelites having dwelled in real huts the Torah would command us to re-enact history and build these huts for ourselves on the Sukkot festival. The message of the commandment would be to bring home to us the devotion of the Israelites to G’d seeing they had to travel for 40 years in the desert with their wives and children, erecting and dismantling their huts each time they journeyed, etc. This would also be what the prophet Yoel 2,20 had in mind when he described the condition of the desert as “a parched and desolate land;” the Torah (Numbers 20,5) speaks of the desert as “not a place fit for planting seed where either fig trees or grapevines could grow.” The prophet Jeremiah 2,31, quoting G’d asks the rhetorical question: “have I been like a desert to Israel or a land of deep gloom?” What the prophet meant was that G’d used the barrenness of the desert to remind the Israelites of how He had not allowed them to feel deprived by the fact that they were traversing such unfriendly territory. He had provided for them all the comforts of life which their natural habitat could not provide for them. If one accepts the view of the people who believe that the Israelites had dwelled in actual huts one must suppose that they had had regular commercial contact with traders from far off who had brought to them the various necessities of life including plants, etc.
    If one accepts the view of the second group of sages that the Israelites’ “huts” consisted of these protective clouds of the Lord known as ענני הכבוד in our literature, the reason may be that the Israelites were described on occasion as traveling at night under the light and protection of the pillar of fire. According to Deut. 16,14 we must imagine the camps as surrounded on all sides by miraculous manifestations of the attribute of כבוד. It is most likely the correct meaning of our verse that the manifestations of G’d’s clouds and pillars are referred to here as “huts,” and that the word ‘huts’ is employed by the Torah to describe protective cover. The words: “when I took the Jewish people out of Egypt,” i.e. immediately, lends weight to the opinion that the word is used in an allegorical sense. This would be compatible with the words of Isaiah 4,5: “the Lord will create over the whole shrine and meeting place of Mount Zion a cloud by day and smoke with a glow of flaming fire by night. Indeed over all the glory shall be hung a canopy which will serve as a hut for shade by day and as a shelter for protection against drenching rain.” The “hut” the prophet speaks of is clearly reminiscent of the ענני כבוד and the kind of illumination for the righteous in the future. Concerning this development in the future David said in Psalms 27,5: “He will shelter me in His hut (סכה) on an evil day, etc.”
    24,4. על המנורה הטהורה, “On the pure Menorah, etc.”  Nachmanides points out that in Exodus 27,21 where the subject of preparing the oil for the Menorah is first dealt with there is no mention of the Menorah being “pure.” He explains the reason for this as being that that paragraph was not the primary paragraph dealing with the laws concerning the Menorah. When Moses was told in Exodus 27,20: “and you are to command the Children of Israel,” this referred to the details about the oil etc., being revealed to the Israelites eventually. However, here we are dealing with the principal paragraph dealing with the rules governing the use of the Menorah and how it was to be serviced. This is why the words “on the pure Menorah” were added here to tell the Priests that unless the Menorah was in a state of ritual purity the whole procedure could not be performed. This became important when the Hasmoneans recaptured Jerusalem and the Holy Temple from the Greeks and as a result they introduced the festival of Chanukah; and it is important nowadays when we have no Temple, no red heifer, etc. Had the Torah only written the paragraph in Exodus chapter 27 we would have thought that the procedure of preparing oil, etc. was to be performed even in the absence of a Menorah or when the Menorah was temporarily broken.
    Sifra Emor 13,12 explains that the words על המנורה הטהורה may also be understood as על טהרה של מנורה, “directly on the Menorah,” i.e. there is not to be any insulating material or other matter between the lights (the containers of the oil and wick) and the golden Menorah. Moreover, the words also imply that the lights are to be prepared and kindled inside the Tabernacle, על המנורה, on the Menorah; lit matches, lit wicks, etc., are not to be brought into the Tabernacle and then be placed on the Menorah, but the whole procedure is to be performed inside the Sanctuary. The word תמיד at the end of the verse means that this procedure overrides the Sabbath and is to be performed seven days a week.
    
    24,7. ונתת על המערכת לבונה זכה, “You shall put on (each) stack frankincense, etc.” The twelve loaves of bread mentioned here and the frankincense were both mandatory so that the absence of either invalidated the whole procedure (compare Menachot 27). They related to each other just like the etrog and the lulav, or the blue wool thread and the white threads on the tzitzit. (according to an opinion expressed in Menachot 38 that when תכלת, the blue colour needed for that thread is available, a garment which has only white tzitiyot is not fit to be worn).
    The reason that the מנחה offering of a Sotah (woman suspected of marital infidelity) or the מנחה offering of any sinner was unaccompanied by such frankincense as is mentioned here as mandatory is that the Torah expressly forbade it (Leviticus 5,11 and Numbers 5,15)  in order to express G’d’s disapproval of the persons having to bring these offerings, i.e. that at that time and until atonement has been obtained the attribute of Justice is poised to strike such a woman. 
     והיתה ללחם לאזכרה, “it will serve as a remembrance for the bread.” Seeing that normally some parts of a sacrifice always wind up on the Altar and in the case of the show-breads this is not the case, the frankincense is the only reminder to G’d that a sacrifice has been offered. Once the frankincense has been offered up this triggers remembrance of the show-breads which had been presented on the Table. Following this, the blessing of our sources of food which is the objective of this procedure can be applied by G’d. This is also the significance of there being twelve such show-breads, i.e. that all the twelve angels surrounding the celestial throne receive Divine input in the form of such blessing. These twelve angels are also known as the four camps of the Shechinah. The encampments of the Jewish people in the desert around the Tabernacle were patterned after what is known about similar procedures in the celestial regions. The four “camps” in the celestial regions serve as the point of departure for directing G’d’s blessing to the four directions on earth, i.e. North, East, South, and West. Three of these angels face each direction. The whole concept is like the significance of the four flags of the four camps of the Israelites in the desert. This concept was later on illustrated in the throne of King Solomon which featured 12 lions (Kings I 10,20). The total amount of flour comprised by the twelve show-breads was “24 tenths” (of the epha). This was an allusion to the twelve tribes of Israelites on earth and the twelve angels in the celestial regions.
    24,10. ויצא בן אשה ישראלית, “the son of a Jewish woman came forward, etc.” The meaning of the word ויצא here is that he came forth from his house, or from wherever he had made his quarters.
   בתוך בני ישראל, “among the Children of Israel, etc.” He came from his private place to the midst of the people.
   וינצו במחנה, “they  fought in the camp.” It is possible that seeing that the word ויצא did not specify from where the son of the Jewish woman came it has a similar meaning to the word ויצא  in Kings I 22,21 ויצא הרוח, where it is a reference to the spirit of Navot who had been the victim of a judicial murder and whose soul sought revenge. Both the term יצא and באה are used allegorically in a spiritual sense. Another example is Kohelet 8,10: ובכן ראיתי רשעים קבורים ובאו, “and likewise I saw the wicked who had been buried and ‘came.’” How could a buried person “come?” Clearly, the meaning of the word is not to be understood in its usual sense. This is also the meaning of Job 1,21 when he said ערום יצאתי מבטן אמי וערום אשוב שמה, “I came out of my mother’s womb naked and I will return to earth naked.” The words יצא and בא appear as figures of speech. I believe that this is what our sages alluded to in Tanchuma Emor 23 when Rabbi Levi is quoted on these words as saying that the blasphemer of whom the Torah spoke here יצא, “left עולמו,” “his world,” and that this is the reason the word ויצא here was preceded by the word עולם, “world” in the last word of the previous paragraph. Man is perceived of as being עולם קטן, “a small world, a microcosm.” We find a reference to the word יצא meaning leaving one’s country such as in Ezekiel 36,20 or as meaning “emerging,” originating, such as in Ezekiel 15,7 מהאש יצאו, “they emerged from fire,” meaning that these people had been born as a result of burning sexual passion of a man and a woman when they embraced in a sexual embrace.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Emor 23-24: the meaning of the words ויצא בן אשה ישראלית is that the blasphemer excluded himself from the legislation of the previous paragraph dealing with the show-breads. He made sarcastic remarks about this legislation, ridiculing it by drawing attention to the fact that these loaves were replaced only once a week on the Sabbath. He questioned how one could present G’d with stale bread, saying that it is customary for kings to eat fresh bread every single day. How could one dare present G’d with bread which might be up to nine days old?
    A Baraitha understands the word ויצא to mean that the blasphemer emerged from the court of Moses where he had been found guilty. He had previously erected his tent in the camp of Dan (the tribe his mother belonged to). The Danites did not want him there (as his father was not of their tribe). When the matter was brought before Moses, Moses ruled in favour of the members of that tribe against this man. He was upset about this ruling and cursed the Lord to give vent to his frustration.
   והוא בן איש מצרי, “and he was a son of an Egyptian man.” According to Tanchuma Emor 24 he was the son of the Egyptian whom Moses had slain when he had killed an Israelite (the husband of the blasphemer’s mother).
   בתוך בני ישראל, “among the Children of Israel.” These words teach that the man in question had converted to Judaism (Sifra Emor 14,1). 
   וינצו במחנה, “they quarreled in the camp.” This prompts us to ask that if the two people quarreled about something why would one of them use this as a pretext to curse G’d? He should have been angry at Moses, or he could have attacked Moses physically if he felt wronged. Why did he curse the name of the Lord? Perhaps what happened was that the blasphemer told Moses during the trial that his father had been killed and he mentioned to Moses how he had been killed, i.e. that Moses had uttered the holy name of G’d and cursed his father who died as a result. This is why now, when he was found guilty by Moses, he in turn cursed the name of the Lord who had been the cause of his own father’s untimely death. He used the name which he had heard for the first time when he stood at Sinai and listened to the Ten Commandments. The fact that this paragraph is followed immediately by the portion commencing with mention of Mount Sinai is an allusion to the relevance of Mount Sinai to what occurred here.
    Seeing that the blasphemer had not been willing to come to the Tent of Meeting, the Torah reports hat the people brought him to Moses. This may be the reason why here- contrary to Numbers 15,33 where the Torah reports the man who gathered wood on the Sabbath as being brought before Moses and the whole congregation,- the words ואל כל העדה, “and to the whole congregation,” are missing.
    I wonder why the Torah bothered in this instance to tell us that while the Israelites were in the desert that one of them cursed the name of the Lord thus causing disrespect for G’d? Surely if all the Torah wanted was to teach us the penalty for such a blasphemer, all it had to write was a verse informing us (as it did anyway in verse 15) that anyone who curses the Lord employing His holy Name the tetragram when doing so is guilty of being stoned to death? Even the Gentiles had been warned not to curse the Lord (compare Sanhedrin 56) seeing it is one of the seven commandments which is applicable to all of mankind. There certainly was no need to teach Israelites that this is a cardinal sin!
    I suppose we must answer that the Torah hoped to achieve two objectives when not only spelling out this legislation here but  illustrating it with a personal example so that we would remember this better. 1) The fact that this individual who was guilty of this sin is named is a compliment to the Jewish people, seeing that only one single person had been guilty of that sin during the forty years in the desert and even that person had been the son of an Egyptian father. 2)  the story teaches the important principle that the only way to become guilty of this ultimate crime is to first pronounce the holy Name and then utter a curse upon it. This we derive from the wording of the Torah: ויקב בן האשה הישראלית את ה' ויקלל, “the son of the Israelite woman pronounced the name of the Lord and cursed it” (verse 11). The sequence in which the blasphemer acted made him liable to the death penalty. When someone means to bless the name of the Lord he has to do so in the reverse manner, i.e. first to concentrate on the individual letters of the tetragram and on their meaning and subsequently to pronounce the name (in the permissible formula). When done in such a manner one qualifies for the reward due to people who bless the Lord. There is an allusion to this sequence in Psalms 145,1, a psalm we recite several times a day, where David wrote  ארוממך אלוקי המלך ואברכה שמך לעולם ועד, “I will extol You my G’d my King, and bless Your name forever and ever.” The reward for following this procedure perfectly is long or infinite life. David preceded the sages in Berachot 8 who directed that a person should make a point of not beginning to pray until he has walked a distance of the width of two entrances to the Synagogue. (he should take time to concentrate before commencing to say the words).
   בן הישראלית, “the son of the Israelite woman.” These words (the repetition of the information) teach that the child of a sexual union between a pagan and a Jewish woman is not Jewish (by birth). Although, according to the Talmud (Yevamot 45), such a child is Jewish regardless of whether the mother was married or single at the time of that union, the fact remains that we consider the child as genetically tainted, not permitted to marry a priest if a daughter. It would certainly not be permitted to share in the distribution of the land of Israel, make his home amongst the camps with the flags as such membership was limited to לשמות מטות אבותם, “for the names of the tribes of their fathers” (Numbers 26,55). This is the opinion of Nachmanides.
    
    24,11. ושם אמו, “and the name of his mother, etc.”  Whenever someone displays signs of effrontery and disdain towards the Jewish religion and G’d it is time to examine his maternal genealogy as it is certain that the droplet of sperm which such an individual grew out of reflected a negative deed or thought at the time when marital relations which produced that baby took place. Unless the Torah wanted to teach us something beyond the meaning of the mere information contained in the text it should have simply written: ויצא בן אשה ישראלית ושמה שלומית בת דברי למטה דן, “the son of an Israelite woman by the name of Shlomit bat Divri from the tribe of Dan went out.” The reason the Torah followed a circuitous route before revealing the name of the blasphemer’s mother was that it wanted to keep it secret until after telling us what her son became guilty of. This is why we were first told that he cursed the name of the Lord (Verse 11). By mentioning her name last, the Torah suggested that the original cause of such a terrible sin being committed was the mother of the sinner who had been guilty of a trespass.
    The baby grows out of the mother’s blood, is nurtured for the length of the pregnancy by the mother’s blood and even after the mother has given birth she nurses the child thus transmitting milk which originally was her blood. As a result of all this it is no more than reasonable that the child absorbs greater genetic input from his mother than from his father. This will eventually be reflected in his deeds which will reflect the mother’s character more than that of the father. This is the reason why we find that the prophets who wrote the Books of the prophets, particularly the Books of Kings always made a point of mentioning the name (and sometimes origin) of the king’s mother. An interesting example is Kings I 22,42 where the mother of King Yehoshaphat, Azuvah daughter of Shilhi, is mentioned. In Kings I 15,2 we are told that the mother of King Aviyam of Yehudah was Maachah daughter of Avishalom. The reason the prophet Jeremiah saw fit to include this information was to give us a little more psychological insight into any character weakness displayed by the sons of such women. (Or, vice versa, if the mothers were outstandingly good women). If a person is an outstandingly righteous individual this reflects credit on his mother who transmitted to him so many of her positive genetic qualities.
    A good branch is always testimony that the root is healthy. This is reflected in the Torah writing in Exodus 6,29: “Amram took Yocheved his aunt as a wife.” The Torah mentions that a righteous person married a righteous woman and that the children were two outstandingly righteous sons, Aaron and Moses, and one outstandingly righteous woman, Miriam. The Torah reports something similar when reporting the marriage of Eleazar, son of Aaron to one of the daughters of Putiel, i.e. a descendant of the righteous Joseph (Exodus 6,25), and the son born to this union was Pinchas. We are told in Psalms that David described himself as: “I am Your servant, son of your servant maid” (Psalms 116,16). According to Kimchi, what David meant was that he had the good fortune of having been born to a father and a mother both of whom excelled in virtues.
    Seeing that the Torah chose to reveal the name of the blasphemer’s mother we may deduce that this was a unique occurrence during the whole forty years the Israelites wandered in the desert and that amongst the other six hundred thousand families no genealogical flaw of this kind could be found. Moreover, you must not wonder how it could be that the blasphemer’s mother was an adulterous woman. She had been quite inactive in the matter. When the Egyptian climbed into her bed at night she had presumed that it was her husband joining her. The Torah applies the term זונה, (whore), to any woman who has had sexual relations with a man forbidden to her under Biblical law, regardless of whether such a union occurred voluntarily or not (Compare our comments on Leviticus 21,6).
   שלומית, she would inquire after everybody’s well being, prattling and saying: “hello to you (female), hello to you (male)!”
   בת דברי למטה דן, “daughter of Divri of the tribe of Dan.” Mention of the name of the tribe shows that the deeds of a wicked person reflect discredit not only on his father and mother but also on the tribe he or she belongs to. The reverse is true of the righteous. When Oholimov was appointed as Betzalel’s assistant (Exodus 38,23) the Torah does not only tell us the name of his father Achisamach, but also the name of his tribe, i.e. the tribe of Dan.
    
    24,16. בנקבו שם יומת, “when he curses the holy Name he shall be executed.” The Torah immediately continues to write that any man committing murder shall be executed. This prompted our sages in Sanhedrin 58 to teach that anyone striking the cheek of his fellow is considered as if he had struck G’d’s “cheek” (in an allegorical manner of speaking).
    
    24,21. ומכה נפש בהמה ישלמנה ומכה אדם יומת, “if someone strikes an animal he shall pay for it, whereas if someone strikes (dead) a human being he shall be executed.” The reason the Torah continues immediately with the words: “there shall be one law for you, etc.,” is that the investigation of crimes involving financial damage or bodily harm resulting in death should be subject to equally thorough investigation as to who is responsible. The word אחד in verse 22 refers to The “One and only G’d;” Torah legislation is based on G’d and not on the considerations applicable in Gentile jurisprudence.
    
    24,22. כגר כאזרח יהיה, “the proselyte and the native shall be alike (before the law).” The Gentile who came from a foreign land and separated himself from his homeland is called גר by the Torah as he resembles a גרגיר, a berry falling of a tree which is separated from its source. If someone’s parents came from the same town he is called an אזרח, a “native.” The word appears in that sense in Psalms 37,35 ומתערה כאזרח רענן, “and well-rooted like a robust native tree.” The Torah wanted to make the point that in spite of these differences in origin of certain people, the law is to be applied to them equally.
   כי אני ה' אלוקיכם, “for I am the Lord your G’d.” The Torah means that “if you practice these principles then I will indeed be the Lord your G’d. From this positive statement you can also deduce that failure to apply the law equally to natives and people who have converted to Judaism means that G’d will not consider Himself as our exclusive G’d with all the beneficial consequences of that elevated status. Put differently: if you discriminate against newly converted Jews, then G’d will discriminate against you. Additionally, if you submit your legal problems to arbitration by courts which do not recognise the אחד, the One and only G’d as the sole lawgiver, then you are (in the words of Rashi at the beginning of Parshat Mishpatim) as if desecrating the name of the Lord and at the same time lending stature to the pagan religions. Not only this, anyone who wields enough influence to dissuade a Jew from bringing his disputes before a gentile tribunal and does not use his powers of persuasion on Jews about to do this commits an act of desecrating the name of the Lord. Not only does one thereby lend greater stature to the religion practiced by the members of such courts, but one contributes to their depriving the Jews of money which is rightfully theirs. The concept of meting out fair justice is a Torah exclusive as we know from Psalms 147, 19-20) “He issued His commands to Yaakov, His statutes and rules to Israel; He did not do so for any other nation; of such rules they know nothing.”
    
    
    
   בהר  סיני
    
    
   צדיק יהגה לענות ופי רשעים יביע רעות, “The heart of the righteous plans his answers carefully; the mouth of the wicked pours forth evil.” (Prov. 15,28) Solomon contrasts the opposite natures of the righteous and the wicked. He reveals to us that the wicked are proud and arrogant by nature, whereas the righteous is modest and self-effacing. He does so in order to encourage us to practice the positive virtues of the righteous and to avoid practicing the negative virtues of the wicked. The word לענות used by Solomon when describing the righteous is the same word applied by Moses to Pharaoh in Exodus 10,3 when he asked Pharaoh how long he would still refuse to humble himself, לענות, before the Lord? Moses challenged Pharaoh saying that since he had not yet humbled himself before the Lord his answer to the requests made of him by G’d through Moses would reflect his arrogance. Man’s speech is a mirror of how or what he thinks. The חכמי המוסר (Chovot Halevavot section habechinah chapter 5) describe language as the writing quill of the heart. Seeing the righteous person has a clean conscience the words he speaks truly reflect what he thinks and what is in his heart. The reverse is true of the wicked person. It is not enough that he has arrogant thoughts in his heart, but he has enough effrontery to verbalise his arrogance, showing one and all that he is a foolish person.
    
    It is a well known fact that self-effacement is one of the finest positive virtues as our sages have taught us (Chulin 89) the universe endures only due the people who perceive themselves as if they were of no consequence; this is what is meant by Deut. 33,27: ומתחת זרועות עולם, “and he who perceives of himself as beneath (everybody else) is what results in the world being planted successfully.” Examples of how the righteous down- graded their own selves are found in Genesis 18,27 when Avraham described himself as עפר ואפר, “dust and ashes.” Moses and Aaron when challenged by the people in Exodus 16,8 exclaimed ונחנו מה “who are we?” They meant that since they themselves derived all their spiritual input only from G’d why would the people complain against them! We find that in Psalms 22,7 David describes himself as “a worm, not a man.” Furthermore, we have a tradition that the presence of G’d manifests itself only to the humble, the self-effacing (compare Mechilta on Exodus 12, item 9). This is also what is meant in Isaiah 57,15: “I dwell on high, in holiness; yet with the contrite and the lowly in spirit - reviving the spirits of the lowly.” Similarly, Torah knowledge becomes the permanent property only of the lowly in spirit (compare Derech Eretz zutta 8). Our sages in Taanit 7 ask: “why is the Torah compared to water so that the prophet Isaiah 55,1 when inviting people to learn Torah, called out: “come all you who are thirsty for water and get water!” Just as waters leave the elevated place they originate in and flow downwards, so the Torah cannot be at home for long in someone whose heart feels proud and superior to others. In the Aggadah of Eyruvin 55 we also have a statement that the words of Moses In Deut. 30,12  that the Torah is not found in heaven refers to arrogant people and that Torah does no make its home in the brain of such people. People who raise their own importance as if it reached heaven, are not liable to retain their Torah knowledge. True Torah knowledge is attained by those who “kill” themselves (i.e. kill their ego) in order to attain it. The Torah speaks of אדם כי ימות באוהל “when someone dies in the tent” (of Torah), compare Numbers 19,14. Our sages (Bereshit Rabbah 19,7) have formulated the principle that עיקר שכינה בתחתונים, that the principal manifestation of G’d’s attribute of כבוד is found among the terrestrial beings, as we know from Genesis 3,8 “they heard the voice of G’d walking by Himself in the garden following the prevailing wind of the day.” David alluded to the mystical element in all this in Psalms 104,17 when he said: “the stork has her home in the junipers.” [The word חסידה here translated as “stork,” was also the name of a daughter of Avraham who excelled in deeds of loving kindness for mankind which is why her name became known as חסידה, (as opposed to חסיד, masculine) compare Zohar Pinchas 217. Rabbi Chavell. Ed.] Seeing that Adam sinned, the Shechinah began its gradual retreat from the terrestrial universe, a retreat which was reversed only with the advent of Avraham and which was reversed totally with the inauguration of the Tabernacle. The Torah was revealed on Sinai, a low mountain instead of on a high mountain such as Mount Hermon. This was intended to further make the point that what appears to dwarf all else physically is not necessarily what Torah and its message is all about. In Psalms 68,17 David refers to the hostility of the mountains of Bashan toward the mountain on which the Torah was given, Mount Sinai. Those mountains thought that they had a far better claim to serve as G’d’s residence on earth. [I have translated the author’s words according to the text in my and other editions, although, personally, I feel that the jealousy of the mountains in Bashan described in the verse quoted was directed against Mount Zion, the site of the Temple, much lower than the mountains of Bashan. After all, the psalm speaks about לשבתו “serving as His residence.” Mount Sinai never served as the site of G’d’s residence on earth. Ed.]
    
    25,1. וידבר ה' אל משה בהר סיני לאמור, “The Lord spoke to Moses at Mount Sinai, to say:” Most of the ancient commentators were perplexed why the Torah suddenly inserted a reminder of Mount Sinai into this verse when other similar verses introducing different kinds of legislation simply begin with the words: וידבר ה' אל משה לאמור? The insertion of the words בהר סיני prompted Sifra Behar 1,1 to comment that the Torah wanted to inform us that just as in the case of the Shemittah legislation the Torah revealed all the minute details of that legislation already at Mount Sinai, so the details of all the other commandments (what we know as the oral Torah) was revealed at the time G’d gave the Torah to Moses at Mount Sinai.
    Nachmanides adds that the words כללותיהן ופרטותיהן ודקדוקיהן, mentioned in Sifra, i.e. their general rules, their specific rules and their minutiae, were well chosen. The “general rules” referred to are mentioned already in Exodus 23,11 where the Torah writes: והשביעית תשמטנה ונטשתה “and in the seventh year you shall let it alone and abandon it (the field).” This is followed by the words: “and the destitute of your people shall eat of it, and the wildlife shall eat what is left.” In other words, we already knew that the general rules of the Shemittah legislation had been told the people at Mount Sinai. In our portion the Torah adds further detail to those general rules. Seeing the legislation is not all written in one part of the Torah, the words “at Mount Sinai” remind us that what is written here was not added at a later stage though the people may have been told it somewhat later. Nachmanides concludes by describing this explanation as כפתור ופרח, “excellent.”
    According to the opinion of Nachmanides the details we are told here were revealed after Moses had received the second set of Tablets, seeing that the principle of the legislation had been revealed at the time of the first covenant. After the second covenant the details and the respective penalties for non-observance were revealed.
    It is possible to argue that seeing the people had heard the Sabbath legislation at Mount Sinai during the recital of the Ten Commandments, and seeing that the Shemittah and Yovel legislation appears to reflect similar motivations to the Sabbath legislation, the Torah reminded the people of that conceptual linkage of the two sets of commandments by introducing the details here with the words “at Mount Sinai.” According to the wording in the Torat Kohanim the words בהר סיני in our verse may be read as part of what follows and as  part of what preceded this verse. Just as the legislation of what to do with a blasphemer is Sinaitic in origin so is what follows, i.e. the laws of how to observe the legislation regulating use of the land in Eretz Yisrael.
    
    25,2. ושבתה הארץ לה', “and the land will observe a rest for the Lord.” G’d sanctified both the seventh day, (Sabbath), the seventh year, (Shemittah) and the seven times seventh year (Yovel). Each of these periods is referred to as “Sabbath” at one time or another. In our verse the Shemittah year is called a “Sabbath.” Sanctifiying the conclusion of the seventh Shemittah year in a 50 year cycle, the Yovel is also called “holy,” as we know from verse 12 in our chapter.
    According to the plain meaning of the text the meaning of this “sanctity” is that the land lie fallow, untouched by human hands for the entire seventh year. Man should not plough it, sow it, reap it, etc. This is the meaning of verses 3-4: “you shall sow the land for six years, and for six years you shall prune your vineyard and gather in its crop; but the seventh year shall be a complete rest for the land, a Sabbath for the Lord. Your field you shall not sow and your vineyard you shall not prune.” You are not even to harvest (in the regular way) what grows by itself during that year. This is the meaning of verse 5: “the aftergrowth (that which grows without ploughing and sowing) of your harvest you shall not reap and the untrimmed grapes of your vineyard you shall not pick.” The word ספיח in verse 5 is similar to the word ונספחו in Isaiah 14,1 “and they will join the house of Yaakov” (the proselytes). Similarly, the vineyard which has not been worked or hoed and not pruned is called נזיר, (like the Nazirite who does not  trim his hair) as one abstains from working it a if it did not belong to you. The general principle governing the rules of conduct during the Shemittah year is that all the activities which suggest ownership of the field or vineyard in question have to be avoided. Any fruit of produce which grows on the field or vineyard during that year is ownerless, available on a “first come first served” basis. The legislation is meant to remind us that even during the years when we treat the land as ours, protected by all kinds of laws against infringement by people who do not own it, the land is really only on loan to us from G’d.
    A kabbalistic approach: The words ושבתה הארץ שבת לה' do not refer to individual parcels of land belonging to individual farmers but refer to the earth as a whole and are an allusion to the seventh millennium following the six thousand years when our terrestrial universe functions normally. They are a reference to the 1000-year transitional period when the earth will be desolate, unfit as a habitat for living creatures (compare Rosh Hashanah 31). That millennium is one described as “eternal rest” (Tamid 7,4), a reference to the world to come after physical resurrection has occurred. According to this concept the Shemittah discussed in our verse would be a  cessation of agricultural activity which is not voluntary but imposed by the conditions prevailing in the universe at that time. [this does not replace the normal meaning of the verses 3-8 which speak about what happens every seven years. It only explains the halachically unnecessary words that “the land shall observe rest for Hashem” (verse 2) Ed.] The observance of a bird’s eye view of what will be in the future, i.e. what we may term a “miniature” shemittah is intended for us to focus on the eventual meaning of the concept. All the severe penalties connected with failure to observe the legislation of Shemittah and Yovel, especially the fact that non-observance is the cause of our losing our homeland and going into exile, is all due to the fact that this legislation is to give us an inkling of a much grander concept G’d has in mind for the existence of the physical universe and the message that an imperfect terrestrial universe is eventually to metamorphose into a perfect terrestrial universe. (Compare 26,34 on the collective penalties for non-observance and Avot 5,9 spelling out the worldwide ramifications of failure to observe the laws of sanctifying the seventh year.)
    
    25,8. שבע שנים שבע פעמים והיו לך ימי שבע שבתות השנים, “seven years seven times; and the seven Sabbaths shall be for you, etc.” Why did the Torah have to add the words והיו לך, “they shall be for you?” Did we not know without these words that seven times seven years equal 49 years? It is possible to explain that the mystical dimension of what is written here is to give us a glimpse into the present as well as into the future. The first number, i.e. 7 times 7 plus the fact that the fiftieth year is holy refers to the commandment of observing the Yovel year. Seeing it is something which we have to perform the Torah asked us to count the years preceding the conclusion of that cycle. The word ספירה implies that something is not constant, not enduring. The word Yovel, on the other hand, implies something complete, permanent, enduring. The number 49 both in terms of the 49 gates of understanding granted to Moses, and wherever the number 49 appears, is an allusion to a domain beyond the merely physical, speaks of something permanent as Solomon said in Kohelet 1,4 והארץ לעולם עומדת, “earth will endure forever” (in spite of the recycling that we observe in nature).
    The mystical dimension is this: We are told in Rosh Hashanah 21 that the world was created with 50 gates (levels) of insight, בינה; Moses was granted 49 of them as David said in Psalms 8,6 ותחסרהו אחד מאלוהים, “You have made him a little less than divine.” The meaning of these words is [I am using my own words here to make the author’s words intelligible, Ed.] that ordinarily every 1000 years is equal to one “level of insight,” so that at the conclusion of 50 periods of 1000 years perfection of the universe is attained. G’d telescoped the 49,000 years to come and taught Moses one level of insight corresponding to each unit of 1000 years. The word לך in the verse וספרת לך “count for yourself,” equals 50 in numerical value, implying that every 50 years, i.e. every Yovel year, a new insight may be attained. The words והיו לך at the end of that period of counting imply that the period of progressing toward perfection then comes to an end and something permanent in terms of levels of insight will have been reached. The reason the Torah speaks of ימי, i.e. “days” or “years of,”  is that that word has a numerical value of 50 just as the word לך. The Torah hints that the total number of years designated for the existence of the terrestrial universe is 50 (000). This is what David alluded to in Psalms 145,13  מלכותך מלכות כל עולמים, “Your Kingdom will span the duration of all “worlds.” We have clear evidence of the fact that G’d considers 1000 years as the duration of an עולם from  Psalms 105,8 where  the psalmist speaks of דבר צוה לאלף דור, “He commanded a “word,” i.e. a directive, to be valid for 1000 generations.” According to this concept the universe has a life span of 50,000 years. The word כל in the verse in Psalms 145 that מלכותך מלכות כל עלמיםn hints at the number 50.000 years seeing that the numerical value of the word כל is 50.
    [In order to avoid a contradiction between the common conception that the world will continue for 6000 years and the seventh millennium will be the time required to make the world over into a perfect place, we would have to consider each 1000 year period after each cycle of 6000 years as a transition to a better world to come until a final conclusion after 49,000 years with the last Yovel. This concept in turn could incorporate the concept discussed at length in the דרוש אור החיים by the author of the famous commentary on the Mishnah Tiferet Yisrael by Rabbi Yisrael Lifshitz of Danzig in which the author is at pains to prove that our universe is not the first of these seven cycles but is already the fifth such cycle, previous cycles having contained lower forms of life only, including pre-historic man. Ed.] 
    
    25,10. וקראתם דרור בארץ לכל יושביה, “you will proclaim freedom throughout the land for all its inhabitants.” According to Rashi from the date on which the shofar will be blown to announce this freedom, it will be called Yovel. Rashi bases this on the words במשוך בקרן היובל, “when a long blast will be blown on the Jubilee horn” (Joshua 6,5). This is also the view of other commentators such as Kimchi. However, Nachmanides refutes this, writing that the קרן היובל as well as the שופרות היובל are expressions applicable only to a ram’s horn, and that the use of such a horn is mandatory only on New Year’s Day in order to remind G’d of the readiness of Yitzchak to die as a martyr for His great Name. Such a restriction does not apply on Yom Kippur, the date this horn is being blown when it is preferable to blow the horn of a יעל, a mountain goat, as indicated in Rosh Hashanah 26. This is why he interprets the word יובל as not referring to the blast blown on the instrument but as referring to the “freedom.” He claims that if it had been referring to the sound of the blast blown on the horn the Torah should have written והעברת שופר תרועה בחדש השביעי בעשור לחודש יובל היא; however, instead the Torah wrote: וקראתם דרור בארץ לכל יושביה, meaning that “you will proclaim freedom  to dwell wherever you feel free to live.”
    The words יובל היא mean that during that year each person will be brought back to the ancestral tract of land which some member of his family might have had to sell during the preceding 49 years. He will be able to rejoin his family. This is the reason why the word יבול is also used to describe both grain and orchard harvests. Low lying areas in which water collects are also known as פלגי יבלי מים, “brooks and watercourses” (Isaiah 30,25). Thus far Nachmanides.
    The meaning of the commandment called יובל, according to the plain meaning of the text is that fields return to their original owners, (seeing only a number of harvests had been sold, verse 15). Even those Jewish servants who had volunteered to stay with their masters beyond the original six years and who had their ear pierced, have to leave their employer during that year. The word Yovel implies that everything and everybody has to return to their original state, i.e. ownership and family.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words יובל היא: The word יובל is derived from the expression ועל יבל ישלח שרשיו, “sending forth its roots by a stream” (Jeremiah 17,8), a hint that all the succeeding generations are traced back to their original roots, to the prime cause which determined their development. This is the reason why the Yovel is called דרור, “freedom,” a reminder of when man was free from sin. All of mankind originated with the pool of souls at G’d’s disposal and eventually this is where the souls will return to.
    Each one of the seven times  periods of a cycle of 7000 years will perform the tasks assigned to the respective day of creation making a total of 49,000 years. When they have completed these 49,000 years  the universe will revert to the Tohu Vavohu which preceded the words בראשית ברא (Genesis 1,1). The meaning of the words בשנת היובל הזאת תשובו איש אל אחוזתו, then is literal, i.e. that each person will return to his origin in the year described as Yovel.
    Philosophers have understood the paragraph as meaning that just as all phenomena in the universe date back to a single original cause, they will again revert to that original cause. If you are fortunate enough to understand the mystical dimension of the legislation of the Shemittah and the Yovel concepts you will not fail to notice the significance of such words in the text as שדך כרמך, ספיח קצירך, ענבי נזירך all of which are in direct speech, i.e. ‘your field, your vineyard, etc.” Prior to the occurrence of the year called שבת לה', “the Sabbath of the Lord,” the Torah had mentioned the suffix “your” only as an afterthought, i.e. תזרע שדך, whereas after that Sabbath the Torah emphasises the fact that it is your field, etc. by writing: שדך לא תזרע, as if to emphasise that you have acquired an inalienable right to that field through the observance of that Sabbath. The Torah emphasises that just as these fields, etc., were yours prior to the “Sabbath,” they are even more so yours after you have observed this “Sabbath.”
    In Psalm 92,1 the hymn dedicated to the Sabbath, the psalmist reiterates that after the Sabbath has been observed the righteous will flourish like the palm tree (verse 13). In another Psalm (72,7) the author describes the righteous as “flourishing in his time, at which time there will be an abundance of peace until there is no more moon.” Such a vision is already forecast in the opening paragraph of the second chapter of Genesis where the Torah writes that G’d blessed the seventh day (verse 3). The verse which we understood as the conclusion of the act of G’d’s creative activity, concludes (quite unexpectedly) with the word לעשות, “to do, or to keep on doing;” In other words, G’d’s active role in shaping the universe did not conclude at the end of the sixth day of creation. With this verse G’d gave notice that He is planning what is going to happen to the various generations even at that stage. You will therefore observe that whereas for the periods prior to this “great” Yovel at the end of 49,000 years no more mention is made of any parts of the terrestrial earth being “yours,” i.e. man’s, up until that time it is described as “man’s” in varying degrees. In connection with what happens after the Yovel the Torah speaks of ספיחיה, נזריה, “its aftergrowth”, “its set aside residual grapes.” This is a clear hint that due to the arrival of the Yovel (the great and ultimate Yovel) everything had reverted to the original cause, i.e. to G’d. I have already drawn attention to this in my commentary on Parshat Mishpatim on Exodus 21,6 in connection with the words ועבדו לעולם. This may be the reason why the Torah writes in Leviticus 27,24 לאשר לו אחזת הארץ, “to the one who had possession of the land,” instead of writing: “who had inherited the land, i.e. נחלת הארץ. The term נחלה is applicable only if the property in question came into one’s possession from someone who owned it previously, whereas the word אחוזה refers to the “original” owner. Solomon alluded to this when he wrote in Kohelet 5,7 כי גבוה מעל גבוה שומר, וגבוהים עליהם, “for high above the high ones is someone who keeps watch, and above them are those who tower above them.” [The thrust of Solomon’s words which are addressed to the oppressors who feel all-powerful, as well as the thrust of the hidden message in our text, is that there are forces at work beyond those that meet the eye when we merely look at the text of the written Torah superficially. Ed.]
    
    25,14. וכי תמכרו ממכר ...אל תונו, “If you will sell property to your neighbour...do not wrong one another.” According to Rashi the verse speaks about monetary wrongdoing, i.e. not to overcharge; when you sell land you are aware how many years there are left until the Yovel year when the land reverts to its original owner. You must make the price of the land commen- surate with the number of years the purchaser will be able to 
 enjoy the use of the land he is purchasing. אונאה, “wrongdoing,” in this instance can occur in both directions. Either the price is too high which makes the seller guilty, or the buyer exploited the seller’s need and paid for less than the number of harvests he can expect until the Yovel year in which case the buyer is guilty of wrongdoing.
    Our sages in Sifra Behar 6,1 understand the wording in our verse, i.e. the Torah’s adding that the sale or purchase is to or from a Jew, (לעמיתך or מיד עמיתך) to mean that land deals should be concluded only between Jews and not between Jews and Gentiles so as not to enable Gentiles to own land in Eretz Yisrael. The reason that this subject of selling land is written adjacent to the legislation dealing with the laws of Shemittah and Yovel is to warn us that he who fails to observe the former because he begrudges the loss of income during the Shemittah year will find that instead of losing only one year’s income he will become impoverished and have to sell his land so that it will not provide him with any income at all (compare Tanchuma Behar 1). The sages go as far as to say that failure to observe the Shemittah and Yovel laws will eventually reduce the guilty party to having to dispose even of his chattels. They base this on the extraneous words מיד עמיתך, “from the hand of your fellow Jew” (verse 14). Chattels are sold from hand to hand. They view our verses as describing a certain sequence of events. 1) You observe the Shemittah legislation. 2) If you do not, you may have to sell your real estate, i.e. ממכר; 3) if you did not get the message that your economic decline was due to your not observing the Shemittah legislation, you will eventually be in a position where fellow Jews have to buy your chattels so that you will have what to live on. Similar commentaries are offered in connection with the need to sell one’s house. In verse 25 the Torah paints a scenario of someone selling part of his inherited land due to having become impoverished; in verse 29 the Torah already speaks about this someone having to sell his home; if he learned his lesson through having been forced to go begging all well and good. If he did not he may be so reduced (verse 39) that he has to sell his service (take a job he is not free to leave for a given number of years.) If this did not teach him why he is in such reduced circumstances, he may find that a Gentile buys him (his body) compare verse 47-to the end of the portion). Thus far the scenarios painted by the Midrash. 
    Unfortunately, a review of Jewish history shows that what is described here as a warning actually became the fate of large sections of the Jewish people prior to the destruction of the first Temple. Jeremiah 34,11 is quite explicit on the matter when he chided his countrymen for making a mockery of the temporary freeing of their Jewish slaves, indirectly forcing them into slavery again as they did not help them to establish themselves. Subsequent to that travesty, he told them in the name of the Lord that their punishment would include loss of their land, marching into captivity by those who had not been killed by the Babylonians first, etc.(compare Chronicles II 36, 17-18).
    
    25,17. ולא תונו איש את עמיתו ויראת מאלוקיך, “Do not wrong one another, but fear your G’d, etc.” The אונאה referred to in this verse is called אונאת דברים, hurting people with words. Examples are: not to offer deliberately poor advice; irritating one’s fellow and provoking him to become angry (Rashi). We have a statement in Baba Metzia 59 that “all the gates are closed (subject to being closed from time to time) except the gate of אונאה, i.e. the supervision by the watchful eye of G’d if someone is guilty of that sin. The sages based this on  Amos 7,7 הנה ה' נצב על חומת אנך וידו אנך, “here the Lord was standing on a wall checked with a plumb line, and in His hand a plumb line.” [the word אנך in that verse is related to אונאה, and the prophet describes the constant alertness of G’d for deviations from the ‘straight and narrow’ symbolised by the plumb line. Ed.] The reason for this is that the victim of such provocations is ever upset and prays to G’d to deliver him from such verbal persecution. This results in G’d’s being involved in matters such as these around the clock. In the event the guilty party who employed language subject to different interpretations consoles himself by saying that his intention to cause his victim anguish could not be proven, the Torah reminds him: “and fear your G’d,” i.e. He knows.
    
    25,18. ועשיתם את חוקותי, “You shall perform My decrees, etc.” The Shemittah and Yovel legislation belongs to the commandments categorized as “decrees.” The words ואת משפטי תשמרו, “and My social laws you shall observe,” which follow immediately refer to the rules about reversing the sales into service, or the sale of property due to duress which when the party making the sale became more affluent can be reversed, as well as to all the laws involving wrongdoing under the heading of אונאה. Both categories of laws are mentioned in our paragraph.
   וישבתם על הארץ לבטח, “you will dwell securely in the land.” This assurance is important as through non-observance of the Shemittah legislation the Jewish people were exiled from the land in fulfillment of the warning by the Torah in 27,34 that the land would recoup the years of Shemittah which the people did not allow it when the people would be in exile. The seventy years of the Babylonian exile were in direct retaliation for the neglect of that commandment (70 times) as we know from Rashi on that verse in 27,34.
    
    25,20. מה נאכל בשנה השביעית, “what are we to eat in the seventh year?” The question seems unfounded as the people would naturally eat the harvest of the sixth year of the cycle in the following year, i.e. the seventh year! We must therefore understand the words בשנה השביעית as linked to the words “here we have not sown and we will not gather in,” at the end of our verse. The question is voiced in the seventh year and refers to the eighth year.
    
    25,22. עד בא תבואתה, “until its harvest will arrive.” The suffix ה at the end of the word תבואת-ה, refers to the eighth year, not the ninth year mentioned in our verse. The meaning of the whole verse is as follows: “you will sow in the eighth year and you will eat from the old harvest until its harvest (the one which you planted) comes in; this will be sufficient for you until the ninth year.” When the Torah adds the words לשלוש השנים, “for these three years,” the reference is not to three whole calendar years but the words: ‘the sixth year’ in verse 21 refer to the second half of that year, the year which G’d blessed with a bumper harvest; the entire seventh year when you did not plough, seed, etc., you will eat of that harvest, plus the first half of the eighth year until the harvest of that year’s planting comes in. This is the commentary by Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra.
    
    25,23. והארץ לא תמכר לצמיתות, “and the land shall not be sold in perpetuity.” this teaches that if the purchaser of the field fails to hand it back to the seller or his heirs at the appropriate time, it will automatically revert to ownership of the original owner in the Yovel  year. The expression צמיתות means something absolute, final. This is why Onkelos translates it as לחלוטין.
   כי לי הארץ, “for the earth belongs to Me.” The message is addressed to the person who has to give back the land he has purchased. He is reminded that seeing the whole universe belongs to G’d he has no reason to feel aggrieved. G’d is at liberty to make dispositions over what is His (compare Sifra Behar 4,8).
    A kabbalistic approach: the words “for the earth belongs to Me,” are a reminder that in the “great” Yovel which we have discussed earlier the entire earth will revert directly to G’d. This is what David had in mind when he said in Psalms 24,1: “the earth  and all that is thereon belongs to the Lord, the world and its inhabitants.” Do not ignore the letter ל the largest of the letters in the aleph bet at the beginning of that hymn, i.e. ל-י-ה-ו-ה. The experts of the Kabbalah have called this letter ל “a tower sprouting forth into space” (compare Sanhedrin 106). This is an allusion to all that we wrote earlier about the terrestrial earth reverting to Tohu Vavohu at the end of seven Yovel cycles each of seven thousand years.
    Another way of approaching the subject mentioned by David in that Psalm [I suppose that the author’s difficulty is another hymn ( Psalms 115,16) in which the earth is described as man’s whereas heaven is described as G’d’s. We need to reconcile the different versions. Ed.] The words לי הארץ, “the earth is Mine,” refers to the “earth’s” equivalent in the celestial spheres, a phenomenon which is inactive in the terrestrial spheres during the seventh year, the Shemittah year. This cessation of celestial “earth’s” input into terrestrial earth during that year is as if G’d had renounced ownership of it during that period. Seeing that it is no longer G’d’s, how could it be man’s i.e. “yours,” seeing that all you have you have received from Me. This may also be the meaning of the words of the Midrash (Sifra Behar 4,5) “for strangers and settlers are you to Me.” G’d is warning the Israelites not to consider themselves as the centre of the earth, its most important phenomenon. The words אתם עמדי, “you are with Me,” in that Midrash mean that a servant should never aspire to be more than his master. It is enough if he attains parity with his master. Translated into our situation it is as if G’d said to the Jewish people: “as long as the earth is Mine, i.e. when I treat it as Mine, it is also yours. When I do not relate to it as Mine, it is not yours either.” G’d said that during the Shemittah year He considers earth as if it were not His. The meaning of our verse then is simply this: “when the earth is Mine, as evident by celestial input from Me in the years other than the Shemittah year, it is also yours. When it is not Mine, seeing that I do not provide any celestial input into it, i.e. in the Shemittah year, it is also not yours. The reason that it cannot be yours during such a time is that you could not possibly have a greater claim to it than I have.”
    
    25,25. כי ימוך אחיך ומכר מאחוזתו, “When your brother becomes impoverished and sells you a part of his inherited land, etc.” The introduction to this legislation teaches that one does not have the right to sell the land one has inherited in Eretz Yisrael from one’s forefathers except when in economic distress. In addition the Torah teaches that even if one is forced to sell, one should retain at least part of one’s holding.
   ובא גואלו הקרוב אליו וגאל את ממכר אחיו, “and his redeemer who is closest to his brother shall come and redeem his sale;” this law which the Torah promulgates here is based on the compassion one is to display for the person, in particular a relative, who was forced to sell part or all of his ancestral property. The Torah sets aside a certain period of time during which such land is subject to “buy-back.” He can either buy it back himself or the redeemer can buy it back for him. Failing an improvement in the seller’s circumstances or in the absence of a redeemer willing or able to buy it back, it reverts to the seller in the Yovel year.
    The minimum time period the new owner is allowed to retain what he has purchased regardless of a redeemer offering the “buy-back” is two years. This is the reverse of the rules pertaining to the sale of a house we shall read about presently. When selling a field the right to “buy-back” does not begin until after two years, whereas the right to buy back a house in a walled city which was sold due to economic distress expires at the end of a year. Houses in open areas are considered like fields, i.e. they revert in the Yovel or are bought back after a minimum of two years in the new owner’s possession.
    A Midrashic approach (based on Tanchuma). The choice of the word וכי ימוך suggest that the economic eclipse suffered by the person mentioned in our verse is due to his being “soft” מכין in his מצוה-performance. The words “and he sells part of his possessions,” imply that they are sold to Gentiles who may have demanded payment of debts. The redeemer mentioned refers to G’d who is described in Jeremiah 50,34 as “their Redeemer is mighty, His name is the Lord of Hosts.” The words הקרוב אליו also refer to G’d seeing that in Psalms 145,18 G’d is described as “near” all those who “call upon Him.” The words אלך אשובה אל מקומי, in Hoseah 5,15 meaning: “I will go and return to My abode,” instead of אלך ואשובה, are the difference between something final and something temporary. The wording without the letter ו in front of the word אשובה means that G’d’s turning away from Israel is not final and absolute but that due to the troubles which will afflict the people once G’d turns His back on them they will repent and G’d will once again embrace them as is written in Deut. 4,30: בצר לך ומצאוך, “when you are in trouble and they have found you (the afflictions) you will return to the Lord your G’d.” When that happens, says G’d through the prophet, “I too will restore My Presence, Shechinah.” 
    
    25,29. ואיש כי ימכור בית מושב עיר חומה, “and a man who will sell a house which is his residence in a walled city, etc.” After the Torah had earlier described someone who, through having fallen on hard times, was forced to sell part of his ancestral land-holdings and had legislated that he will get his land back no later than the Yovel year, that legislation was in recognition of the crucial importance of such a field for a person’s economic independence. He needs it to earn his living. Now the Torah speaks about someone who had to sell his residence, a source of profound embarrassment to him. In order for such an embarrassment and related social fallout to be minimised, the Torah allows such a person to buy back his house immediately, within a year of the sale. The purchaser cannot object.
    A Midrashic insight into this legislation (compare Tanchuma Behar 1): The word איש here is a simile for G’d. G’d’s “house,” i.e. the Temple, was sold to the Chaldaens (Babylonians). The term בית מושב here is appropriate seeing that the Temple has been described by Psalms 132,13 as כי בחר ה' בציון אוה למושב לו, “for the Lord chose Zion, He desired it as a residence for Himself.” What happened to this residence? Look at Kings II 25,9 where we are told that “Nebuzaradan burned the House of the Lord, the king’s palace and all the houses in Jerusalem as well as every great house he burned by fire.” The expression עיר חומה, is also reflected in that verse in the Book of Kings where the prophet reported about the wall around Jerusalem being put ablaze and burned by the combined army of the Chaldaens (Kings II 25,10).
   ימים תהיה גאולתו, “the period during which it may be redeemed extends for one year.” The wording means that the 12 month period during which this house may be redeemed may be combined between so many months in one calendar year and the balance in the next calendar year. This is also what the sages meant when they described the age of the Messiah’s coming as extending over 2000 years, i.e. part in one millennium and part in another (Avodah Zarah 9). 
    
    25,38. אני ה' אלוקיכם אשר הוצאתי אתכם, “I am the Lord your G’d Who has taken you out, etc.” According to Baba Metzia 61 in this verse G’d refers to how He distinguished between each drop of sperm in order to know which firstborn was an Egyptian and which was not, as a result of which the former were killed and the latter were redeemed. Similarly, G’d warns that when the time comes He will apply similar careful distinction between who has lent money to a fellow Jew charging interest and who has not. The former will be punished, and it will not help them to claim that they thought the recipient was a Gentile to whom it is permissible to charge interest. This is behind our verse (36) “do not accept from him or charge him interest, but fear your G’d.” The Torah invokes the fear of G’d also in connection with the warning not to impose undignified labour on a Jewish servant (verse 43). Telling such a servant to heat the cup of his master when there is no need for this to be done is considered as demeaning the servant. Whenever there are no objective yardsticks for determining if certain chores are necessary or if the master merely demands them as a form of caprice, the Torah reminds the person demanding such chores to be performed: “fear your G’d,” i.e. He knows what is in your heart even if the servant does not.
    25,47. לעקר משפחת גר, “or to an offshoot of an alien’s family.” According to the plain meaning of the text the Torah speaks about an alien who never converted but who is descended from a family which converted (i.e. he was alive at the time his parents converted). The verse wants to inform us that regardless of whether the Israelite in question was sold or had sold himself to the convert or to a descendent of this convert who had himself remained a Gentile, such an Israelite is entitled to the rules of redemption, i.e. fellow Jews are obligated to buy his freedom. Onkelos also translates the word as ארמאי, i.e. as “a Gentile.” At any rate, although such a Jew had no right to sell himself to a Gentile, the Torah writes: גאולה תהיה , “he is subject to the normal rules of redemption” (by his fellow Jews). This is spelled out in greater detail by the words: “one of his brethren shall redeem him” in verse 48. If he has relatives able to redeem him, the relatives’ obligation precedes that of other Jews, and if he is able to redeem himself, having come into some money, obviously he is to use the money to buy his freedom. The Torah spells out these various scenarios in verse 49.
    A Midrashic approach to the word לעקר: The word is an alternative for “Roman.” The reason the Torah uses the term עקר for a Roman is that in the future G’d will uproot (עקר) all the Romans. There is a scriptural allusion to this in Daniel 7,11: והובד גשמה ויהבית ליקדת אשא, “its body destroyed and consigned to fire for burning.” This is also what is meant in another Midrash (Tanchuma Behar 1) i.e. that the words in our verse that “if a stranger attains sufficient clout so that the poor amongst you are sold to him,” refer to Nevuchadnezzar King of Babylon. The word תושב, resident, in that verse is taken to refer to the king of the Medes (Ahasverus) whereas the words ונמכר לגר are understood to refer to the kings of the Greeks, whereas the last alternative או לעקר משפחת גר are a reference to the Romans. According to that Midrash our verse alludes to the four exiles the Jewish people will have to endure at one time or another in their history. I believe the sages of the Midrash looked for this allusion as they understood previous parts of our portion already as dealing (allegorically, not halachically) with allusions to both the four exiles and the redemptions to follow. I believe there is also a hint that redemption depends on repentance, although even if repentance is not forthcoming G’d’s timetable for the final redemption will not be delayed on account of this. (compare what the author wrote on Genesis 2,2). The difference between the words אחרי and אחר respectively is that the former refers to something in the distant future whereas the latter refers to something in the immediate future. Seeing that in connection with the עקר משפחת גר the Torah speaks of redemption occurring אחרי, there is every reason to believe that when the Torah uses this paragraph as a metaphor it refers to the ultimate redemption i.e. the one following the Jewish people’s having been sold into exile to the Romans. We may be entitled to extrapolate as a continuation of that thought that the words: “one of his brethren will redeem him,” is a reference to the Messiah, descendant of David, from the tribe of Yehudah. The use of the word אחד in that verse is justified seeing that the tribe of Yehudah is unique, ‘one of a kind.’ Another meaning of the words אחד מאחיו “one of his brethren,” is that the redeemer will be of flesh and blood, a real relative born of a father and mother just as Moses had been a redeemer born of a father and a mother. This may be a polemic by the Midrash against the Christian concept of Jesus not being the son of a biological father and the Romans having adopted the Christian religion as their official religion in the fourth century. The view of the sages in the Midrash is that the wording of our paragraph clearly undermines the theological theories of the Christians.
    The words in verse 49 speaking of the Jew who has sold himself to a Gentile, “or he attains sufficient means,” refer to his having come into some money. [not that he overpowered his master by physical force. Ed.] The word בכסף in the Midrash does not refer to actual money but to repentance, seeing repentance is described as כסף, silver being a metaphor for something white and pure. Repentance has the same effect on the soul, purifying it, removing its stains. [I believe that the author found it difficult to believe that the Jew in question who was now a physical property of the Gentile who had bought him would be able to legally buy his freedom with any money he had inherited or otherwise come by as all his money (under Jewish law) belongs automatically to his master, and he has no property of his own. Ed.]
    The words וחשב עם קונהו, “he must make a reckoning with the one who purchased him” (verse 50), refer to G’d the true קונה, “Owner,” of heaven and earth who prepares for a reckoning with the people who have enslaved His people. The words משנת המכרו לו, “from the year he has been sold to him,” mean from the beginning of the original exile until that of his final redemption. The final redemption is called here by the Torah שנת היובל, “the year of the Yovel,” as that word symbolises freedom as we know from verse 10: “you shall proclaim freedom for all the inhabitants on  earth.” The word יובל is also used in Psalms 76,12 יובילו שי למורא, “”they bring a tribute to the Awesome One.” We also find a verse in Isaiah 66,20 telling us that at that time of the final redemption the nations will all offer gifts to the Lord, just as the Israelites used to do.”
    When the Torah speaks of אם עוד רבות בשנים, or ואם מעט נשאר בשנים (verses 51 and 52 respectively), the meaning is that if at the time the slave (Jew in exile) is to be redeemed there are “still many years left before the Yovel year,” or “there are only a few years left until the Yovel year,“ the Torah uses the euphe- mistic expression to describe the relative degree of repentance by the Jews in exile. Inadequate repentance is described as “many years until the Yovel year,” whereas intensive repentance is described as “only a few years until the Yovel year,” i.e. redemption from exile.
    When the Torah continues in verse 55: ואם לא יגאל באלה, this means “if the redemption cannot occur due to the (inadequate) repentance,” then when the Yovel  year arrives, i.e. the final date in G’d’s timetable for the redemption, ויצא בשנת היבל הוא ובניו עמו “then he together with his sons will go out (into redemption) in the Yovel year.” in other words, the final date G’d has foreseen already at the beginning of creation will not be adjusted due to absence of sufficient merits accumulated by the Jewish people in the interval. All of the foregoing corresponds to the opinion of Rabbi Joshua in Sanhedrin 93 who said that the meaning of the words in Isaiah 60,22 בעתו אחישנה, “at its time I will hasten it,” mean that if there is repentance the final redemption will occur prior to the original date set for it by G’d, whereas if there is no repentance the original date for the redemption will stand. The words הוא ובניו עמו in verse 54 mean that there will be two groups of people who will be redeemed; they are the ones who were outcast and the ones who were scattered amongst the nations (born in exile) with them. [or a reference to initial exile to one country from which the children of the original exiles scattered throughout the globe. Ed.] The words “for the Children of Israel are My slaves, the ones I have taken out of Egypt,” [words which cannot apply literally to returning exiles after thousands of years, Ed] are understood by the Midrash as G’d saying that just as the Exodus from Egypt at the time was a redemption which occurred suddenly, comprehensively, not in stages, so the redemption in the future will parallel those aspects of the Exodus from Egypt. The concluding words of the paragraph אני ה' אלוקיכם, are the promise of the redemption in the future.
    
    25,50. וחשב עם קונהו, “he will make a reckoning with the one who purchased him.” The verse warns that one must make a  meticulous accounting and not try and trick the Gentile in one’s calculations. The reason is that stealing from pagans is prohibited as a form of desecrating the holy name of the Lord. The Torah demands such careful accounting when the Gentile in question is under Jewish authority. I might have thought that seeing the Torah permits charging interest to Gentiles, something which the Torah elsewhere appears to view as a form of unethical conduct, that stealing, at least indirectly, from a pagan is permitted; therefore the Torah makes a point of telling us that this is not so. We know already from Joseph’s brothers whose money had been returned to them by the Egyptians (at least they thought so) that they took it back to Egypt with them (Genesis 43,13) in response to their father Yaakov’s instructions. If Yaakov thought (as he said) that even if the pagans had made an error we must not take advantage of it to their detriment, how much more so must we not disadvantage them deliberately. All of this occurred before the Torah was given, when we did not have these limitations imposed upon us. How much more meticulous must one deal with a Gentile now that the laws of the Torah apply to us! The prohibition is derived from Deut.7,16 that “during the time G’d gives us the land of the seven Canaanite tribes we are commanded to destroy them.” The words אשר אני נותן לכם, “which I am about to give to you,” make this commandment an exception. Only the pagan nations G’d gives to us may be treated in such a fashion as described in that verse. We are to relate to other Gentile nations in accordance with the moral and ethical imperatives which are part of the Jewish code of ethics.
    Another law derived from the words in this verse that one is to make a careful calculation is that the redeemer must calculate the number of years remaining in the contract of the Jewish slave to the Gentile before the Yovel year, and he must pay him for the years of service that the Jew will not serve him. The basis of the law is to prevent the desecration of the Lord’s name, i.e. not to give the pagan an opportunity to claim that our G’d deals unfairly with him who had paid good money for the services of this slave. To allow such a thought to take hold in the mind of a Gentile is a more serious crime than doing the same thing to a Jew.
    The Tossephta Baba Kama 113 states expressly that if one has robbed a pagan one must return the stolen goods. It adds that such robbery is a graver crime than robbing a Jew because the crime includes the sin of desecrating the Lord’s name. When one robs a fellow Jew the victim does not use this as an excuse to question the rules of the Torah and the fairness of G’d.
    You will find an interesting illustration of this principle in the inaugural prayer of Solomon when the Temple was dedicated. Solomon prayed that when a Gentile comes all the way from across the ocean or from countries closer by in order to offer his prayers to the Jewish G’d in the Temple, that G’d should respond positively to such prayer. Regarding similar prayers offered up by Jews, Solomon asked that if the Jews in question were worthy then G’d should respond positively to such prayers. Clearly, the reason that Solomon asked for a blanket acceptance of prayers offered by the Gentiles was in order not to give them an opportunity to denigrate the Jewish G’d which would have been a form of desecrating the Lord’s name (compare Kings I 8,39-43 respectively). Solomon was not afraid that if a Jew’s prayer would not be answered positively, that such a Jew would question the existence or fairness of the Lord as a result.
    
    25,54. ואם לא יגאל באלה, “And if he will not be redeemed by means of these methods, etc.” Our sages in Kidushin 15 explain the words או דודו in verse 49 (normally translated as “his uncle,”) as including all kinds of relatives. The words או השיגה ידו they interpret as referring to the slave succeeding in redeeming himself by his own efforts. The word ונגאל at the end of that verse, they explain as redemption by people not related to the slave. This is why the Torah writes here that if the slave לא יגאל had not been redeemed by other Jews not related to him he will leave in the Yovel year, i.e. against the will of his master the Gentile, seeing that the Torah speaks of a Gentile who lives in the land of Israel under a Jewish government.
    The Talmud in Kidushin 16 already points out that if the Jew of whom the Torah speaks here had been bought by a Gentile in the Gentile’s domain it would be futile for the Torah to write such a sentence as: “he will go free in the Yovel year,” as there is no one to enforce such legislation.
    As to the meaning of the word גאולה, the Talmud in Kidushin 16 already points out that just as redeeming himself (גאולה) makes sense only if the one-time slave now becomes free, so being “redeemed” by either his relatives or other Jews makes sense only if as a result he becomes totally free, not if he changes status from being owned by a Gentile to being owned by a Jew. The word גאל means a transition to absolute inde- pendence. [The author cites the conclusion in the Talmud of an argument whether if a non-relative buys the contract from the Gentile, the Jew has to serve out his time as a servant of the Jew who bought him from the Gentile.].
    
    26,1. לא תעשו לכם אלילים, “Do not make idols for yourselves.” Here the Torah refers to the various forces named earlier whom people worship as אלילים from the root אילות, “strength, power,” calling such idolsאלילים  rather than אילים [which would mean something powerful, Ed.] in order to remind us of the impotence of such idols. Even though such idols may sometimes appear as very imposing and therefore powerful, the fact that their power is derived from outside influences makes them essentially weak, impotent. Having already mentioned אלילים, idols which are natural phenomena such as the sun and the moon, etc., the Torah goes on to mention man-made symbols such as statutes and pillars which were constructed in order to be recipients of the power presumed to reside within the afore-mentioned idols. All this leaves us with the question of why idolatry has been inserted into this paragraph altogether. Our sages in Sifra at the end of our portion answer that the Torah wants to contrast the situation of a Jew who has been sold to an idolater with the danger that being in such an environment he might fall victim to such religious tenets as are believed by his master. He might say to himself that seeing his (successful) master worships such forces it might be well for him to do the same. From this it is only a small step to argue that seeing the sexual mores of his master are quite permissive, he himself would also adopt such mores. Furthermore, seeing that his master does not observe the laws of the Sabbath, he, the servant and property of the Gentile would do the same. The Torah therefore warns that even though one is the employee or slave of such a Gentile this must not lead one to adopt his master’s religious practices.
   ואבן משכית לא תתנו בארצכם להשתחות עליה, “and you must not place a flooring stone made to show an image and bow down to it.” You are not even to use such an image to prostrate yourself to G’d in heaven. (Maimonides Hilchot Avodah Zarah 6,6). The same rule applies to the planting of trees next to the Altar in the courtyard of the Temple (halachah 9 in above-mentioned chapter by Maimonides). The reason for all this is that these were heathen practices at the time. Sifra Behar 9,5 sees in the word בארצכם, “in your land,” a limiting factor for this prohibition; “only in your land,” i.e. outside the Temple, must you not prostrate yourselves to the Lord G’d; inside the holy precincts of the courtyard of the Temple you are allowed to do so on the stones which cover the floor of that building.
    
    26,2. את שבתותי תשמורו ומקדשי תיראו, “You are to observe My Sabbaths and you are to revere My Sanctuary.” According to Sifra Behar 9,6 this verse is a comprehensive warning to observe all the commandments. According to Nachmanides the Sifra means that by warning about the pitfalls of selling a Jew to a Gentile and what might happen to his religious observances while he is in the household of such a Gentile, the Torah effectively issues a warning concerning the observance of all the commandments. Once he is in the house of an idolater he is liable to stop all Jewish observances. Alternatively, we may see in the warning concerning the Sabbath and the Sanctuary a warning which embraces all the commandments, as between them they represent the whole Torah.
   אני ה', “I am the Lord.” These words are a reminder that G’d’s stature as the Lord means that He either rewards or punishes those that observe or transgress the laws of the Torah. Wherever the words אני ה' appear they mean that the commandment they refer to is a very important commandment and that G’d is the one Who rewards or punishes people who observe it or ignore it. This is the reason that this portion concludes with these two important commandments. It is natural that a king commands his subjects to respect and honour him. He does not need to explain why he demands such obeisance. It is enough for him to remind his subjects that he is the king.
    Tanchuma (Bereshit 12) in commenting on Genesis 41,44 draws a comparison for us from when Pharaoh said to Joseph: “I am Pharaoh but without you no one shall lift a hand or foot in the whole land of Egypt.” Pharaoh had already given Joseph his ring of office empowering him to exercise his authority. If the use of the word אני when spoken by a ruler who was only flesh and blood  such as Pharaoh carried so much weight, imagine how much weight the word אני when spoken by G’d the ruler of the whole universe must carry. Solomon made a similar point in Kohelet 8,2 where he wrote: אני פי מלך שמור ועל דברת שבועת אלוהים, “whenever the word אני appears, I warn you to observe it carefully; it is an oath of G’d.”
    
   אם  בחקותי
    
    
    
    
   עטרת חכמים עשרם אולת כסילים אולת, ”The crown of the wise is their riches; the foolishness of fools is folly” (Proverbs 14,10). Solomon informed us here that wealth is an attribute possessed by the wise who benefit by it whereas for the sinners it is an attribute that causes them to stumble. When material wealth is in the hands of the wise person it is a crown and honour for him. The reason is simply that all the time the wise man lacks wealth his wisdom is held in low esteem and his words are not heeded as the general public equates wealth with competence of the person who possesses it. Not only this, but wealth is accompanied by authority to lend power to truth and to effectively denigrate lies, etc. Also, the wealthy wise man is able to spend his wealth in a manner where it does a great deal of good, which in turn will reflect credit upon him and enhance his reputation.
    The reverse is true when fools are wealthy as they boast about their wealth and they employ their wealth to strengthen other like-minded individuals, in the process increasing the amount of sin committed. The financial success of the sinner is always a danger as it serves the fools to maintain their sinful lifestyle, and encourages them to continue in their mistaken ways.
    Wealth is somewhat like the sun which performs contradictory actions. On the one hand, the sun’s rays bleach garments restoring their original whiteness, on the other hand, it blackens the skin of those who expose their skin to the sun on a regular basis. It is up to the recipient to either benefit or suffer from the rays of the sun. Similarly, it is up to the recipient to make proper or improper use of material wealth. For the former such wealth turns into a crown, for the latter it becomes a mark of his folly.
    The reason Solomon used the word אולת, “folly,” twice in this verse is to tell us that wealth for the foolish causes foolishness in the soul of the owners. The following rule governs the matter: wealth first corrupts the body of the foolish (sinful) owners, eventually further corrupting and destroying their souls. The wise, by contrast are on guard against the dangers inherent in owning wealth. As a result of their caution wealth becomes them, enhances their reputation so that they derive both physical and spiritual benefit from it as they are fully aware that wealth and success in this life are only preparatory steps for the needs of the soul so that it will acquire wisdom and perfect itself.
    
    Another lesson by Solomon concerning phenomena which appear at first glance as definitely desirable is found in Proverbs 15,21: “folly is joy for someone devoid of reason; a man of discernment walks a straight path.” Joy, abundant peace, i.e. unconcern about problems in the word, are a folly as they bespeak lack of sensitivity; only people practicing foolish pursuits enjoy such feelings. A discerning individual, instead of sitting back and enjoying his lack of immediate problems learns from this that he should use the opportunity to improve his character traits. This is why the Torah always holds out the promise of success in this world both for one’s body and for one’s soul when one performs the commandments written in the Torah. Such people are aware that the so-called serenity in this world is not an end itself seeing they are matters of interest only to the body, i.e. to the material parts of this universe. However, the purpose of the body, the material parts of this world, is to help us attain spiritual goals, i.e. to attain more knowledge about G’d. In this way we will ultimately attain the joy of receiving the radiations of light from His face. This is our real objective. The Torah therefore assures us that the path to achieving our true aim is via performance of the commandments which in due course will result in our acquiring the merit to enjoy eternal life, something we failed to achieve even with the help of the first and the second Temple.
    
    26,3. אם בחקותי תלכו ואת מצותי תשמרו ועשיתם אותם, “if you will walk in My statutes and observe My commandments and carry them out;” the statutes referred to here are the laws about Shemittah and Yovel which were mentioned in the previous portion. Now the Torah adds that if we observe this legislation G’d will provide rain at the appropriate time and will bless our harvests and all the growth of the earth in order to provide us with abundance of physical and material blessings.
    
    26,6. ונתתי שלום בארץ, “and I will provide peace on earth.” After G’d listed a whole string of blessings which He would provide, the Torah concludes with the ultimate blessing, peace. Our sages in Sifra Bechukotai 1,8 say that the blessing of peace is a reminder that regardless of how much food and drink a person has, if he is not blessed with peace and security the other blessings are of little value. To live in peace and security in Eretz Yisrael is as important as all the other blessings combined.
    A kabbalistic approach to the words: “I will grant peace in your land, etc.” This was a promise that the foundation of the universe (עולם) (known as the emanation יסוד) will remain connected to the ארץ of which the Torah spoke in Genesis 1,1 when mention of earth first occurs. That verse alluded to the mystical dimension of the ten emanations. It is this kind of “peace” with which the Jewish people residing in the land of Israel will be blessed as a consequence of keeping the laws of the Torah. This is the meaning of Solomon in Kohelet 3,11 גם את העולם נתן בלבם, “He also put the world into their heart.” The heart is another word for the earth in the universe, i.e. it is like a wheel within a wheel (Ezekiel 1,16) and the emanation known as כל suffuses everything, i.e. is בכל. Seeing that the abundance (of G’d’s blessings) emanates from the emanations נצח והוד to earth via the emanation יסוד, and the two emanations נצח והוד symbolise the למודי ה', the learned people who have intimate knowledge of the Lord, the sages (Berachot 64) stated that these Torah scholars help increase the peace which is found on earth. They proved this from a verse in Isaiah 54,13: וכל בניך למודי ה' ורב שלום בניך, “when all your children are imbued with knowledge of the Lord, there will be abundant peace among your children.”
    
    26,8. ורדפו מכם חמשה מאה, “and five of you will take up the pursuit of one hundred (of the enemy).” The verse goes on: “and one hundred of you (in units of five) will pursue ten thousand of the enemy.” When you understand the verse in this manner you will have no difficulty with the apparently inflated ratio of Israelites pursuing the enemy. The ratio of one Israelite to 20 of the enemy is the same in both parts of the verse.
    The sages (Sifra Bechukotai 2,4) were not fazed by the apparently lopsided ratio and explained that the power of a few people keeping the Torah is increased out of all proportion when the groups of Torah-observant people increase in number. This is why when there are large numbers of observant Jews they may even put one hundred times their number to flight. 
    
    26,9. ופניתי אליכם, “I will turn (My attention) to you, etc.” I will cause that My grace will remain attached to you. It is a well known fact that this state of affairs is the objective of the intelligence with which man has ben equipped. What is known as רצון ה', “G’d’s grace (goodwill),” is what עולם הבא, the world of the future, is all about. We have an allusion to this in Psalms 30,6 that רגע באפו חיים ברצונו, (normally translated as) “a moment of His anger is like a lifetime of His goodwill.” Here the meaning is understood to be the combined amount of time G’d is angry at the creatures in the terrestrial universe. Or, “G’d needs to vent His anger for a moment at the creatures in the terrestrial world in order for them to ultimately merit enjoying His goodwill in the world to come.” It is as a moment compared to the infinitely long time, “a lifetime.” He displays goodwill in the hereafter.
    When G’d speaks of והתהלכתי בתוככם, “I will walk among you,” in verse 12, we must not understand this in the purely physical sense, but according to Sifra Bechukotai 3,3 it means that in the future, in the hereafter we have described, the Lord will go for a walk among the righteous who have taken their places in that world. The word may be compared to when G’d used to “walk about” in Gan Eden, in Genesis 3,5. It is a metaphor for G’d’s attribute כבוד feeling at home among people. The written Torah, ever at pains to express concepts which do not exist on earth in language we understand, describes such concepts in words we can understand. The word בתוככם, “among you,” may be understood as related to something round, without beginning or end, a circle in which every spot is equidistant from the centre. People who dance in a circle are happy, seeing all of them are equidistant from the point which is the centre, i.e. in this instance the point where G’d is perceived to be.
    Having said that G’d will relate to the Jewish people like the point, centre inside a circle, the Torah goes on to describe the Lord as being G’d for the Jewish people (verse 13). This is an illustration of Isaiah 25,9 who speaks of the Jewish people saying (something sounding almost blasphemous) “here is this One who is our G’d.” This verse is describing graphically the closeness in terms of knowledge and intellectual appreciation of the Lord which will exist in that idyllic period. Just as certain people have intimate psychological knowledge and understanding of certain ones of their friends, so the righteous at that time will have insights into the way G’d operates. Naturally, the word “this” in the verse in Isaiah is not to be understood literally anymore than the mixed multitude speaking of the absent Moses in Exodus 32,1 when they said: “for this man Moses, etc.” meant by the word זה, “this,” that they could see Moses at that time. Seeing that Moses had been well known to the people, it was in order to refer to him as “this man,” even though he was not physically present and visible at that time.
    In other words, our paragraph is an illustration of the fact that there is reward in the hereafter for good deeds performed in this life. The Torah garbed this information in language we can understand, relying on our intellectual astuteness to understand what is meant. It is an unusual thing for the Torah to do this as the Torah does not generally spell out matters relating to the world of disembodied spirits. Even our prophets did not have a clear understanding of what goes on in that world, so that our sages in Berachot 34 went on record saying that all the prophecies of the prophets related only to matters on earth, no one having become privy to anything which goes on in that other world except G’d Himself.” Further proof that this paragraph does refer to matters transpiring in the afterlife is the indisputable fact that the promises recorded here have never come true in history, in life on earth.
    
    26,11. ונתתי משכני בתוככם ולא תגעל נפשי אתכם, “I will place My Sanctuary among you and My spirit will not reject you.” The word געילה, is an expression of פליטה, “retching, vomiting.” We find the word in that sense in Samuel II 1,21 כי שם נגעל  מגן גבורים, “for there (Gilboa) the shield of warriors lay rejected.” David (the author) meant that the shield of the Jewish warriors had rejected the oil of anointing applied to them. In a similar vein we can understand verse 44 in our chapter לא מאסתים ולא געלתים, {even when I punished them by exiling them) “I did not despise them or reject them.” G’d is saying that He did not drive the Jewish people away from Him. Onkelos translates the words ולא תגעל נפשי אתכם similarly, saying ולא ירחק מימרי יתכון. 
    A kabbalistic approach: the word נפשי when applied to G’d is a reference to the Shechinah, an attribute of the Lord. We have another example of the use of this word in that sense in Psalms 24,4 אשר לא נשא לשוא נפשו, “who did not utter a false oath using His attribute of נפש.” The formula swearing an oath had first been used in the Ten Commandments where G’d forbade mentioning His name in vain with the words לא תשא את שם ה' אלוקיך לשוא, “do not utter the name of the Lord your G’d in vain” (Exodus 207). At that point Onkelos translated the same words i.e. לשום את שמו in Deut. 12,5 as לאשראה שכינתה, “to verify the Shechinah.” [The author quotes a number of scriptural texts all of which are supposed to prove that the attribute referred to here as נפש is the attribute of Justice. Seeing that the Torah had already mentioned that G’d had established His Sanctuary among us, i.e. that His presence was amongst the Jewish people, it would be a repetition to understand the word נפשי in our verse as a reference to the same attribute. It is far more likely then to refer to the attribute of Justice, and the Torah promises that even that attribute will not reject the Jewish people. One example where the word נפשי is obviously a reference to that attribute is Jeremiah 5,9 ואם בגוי אשר כזה לא תתנקם נפשי, “shall I not bring retribution to a nation such as this?” I have paraphrased and condensed this somewhat. Ed.]
    
    26,13. ואולך אתכם קוממיות, ”I made you walk erect.” [The author clearly understands this paragraph as  promises for the future rather than as a record of the past. Ed.]. I (author speaking) have already mentioned previously that the promises made in this paragraph have never been fulfilled during the period when the two Temples were standing. They will, however, be fulfilled in the future. Our sages have used this verse to prove the height of average man will be 200 cubits, twice the height of Adam prior to his sin (Sanhedrin 100). We find a similar statement in Baba Batra 75, i.e. that the meaning of the word קוממיות in our verse is two heights of man according to the view of Rabbi Meir, or two hundred cubits as this is twice the height of  the Temple of Herod (after restoration of the second Temple built in the days of Zerubabel).
    The Talmud in Sanhedrin 100 elaborates on the subject of phenomenal developments in the future by stating that G’d would bring to Jerusalem gemstones of gigantic proportions embedding them in the gates of Jerusalem, etc. In their discussion, the sages quote from Isaiah 54,12 that the gates of Jerusalem will be made of precious stones, etc.  [I am condensing this as the reader can read up that section and more in the (translated) Talmud. The important thing is that the sages of the Talmud did not engage in metaphors here seeing that a student who had first ridiculed some of these predictions until he had been quoted the relevant verses from Scripture was fixed by an angry stare of his teacher as a result of which he died and his limbs turned into a heap of ashes. The fact that he did not believe his teacher until given proof was considered heresy, and the terrible punishment would not have been applied to matters which are merely metaphors. Ed.]
    The reason that the word קוממיות ends with the last letter of the aleph bet, the letter ת, is to teach that all these blessings are not likely to become manifest in stages, in installments, but that when the Israelites will observe the Torah from א-ת, from the first letter of the aleph bet to the last letter, only then will all the blessings promised here become due.
    The paragraph dealing with a variety of curses in the event the Israelites would fail to observe the Torah’s commandments begins with the letter ו in verse 14 and concludes with he letter ה at the end of verse 46. In other words, all these curses represent only half of the letters in the tetragram, the last half. This is what the psalmist referred to in Psalm 91,15 when he said עמו אנכי בצרה, “I remain with him (the Jewish people) when it is in distress.” If you will count the number of verses the Torah devoted to the list of blessings and the list of curses respectively, you will find that the Torah used more verses to describe the curses. This phenomenon is repeated in the Book of Deuteronomy where Moses composed both the blessings and the curses (with the approval of G’d). The psychology behind this phenomenon is to warn people of how much harm they will do to themselves if they do not follow the instructions and advice of the Torah to observe the commandments.
    We find a similar phenomenon already at the revelation at Mount Sinai when the attribute of Justice appeared as the awe-inspiring manifestation of thunder-lightning-smoke and trembling of the ground, whereas the attribute of Mercy was wrapped inside of this, not drawing attention to itself. This is in line with the statement of the sons of Korach in Psalms 45,14 that כל כבודה בת מלך פנימה, “that all the honour and glory of the King’s daughter is within,” i.e. that the attribute of כבוד is found not in the fancy garments described in that very verse but beyond it, inside it, where it is not visually imposing. [Elijah’s experience at Mount Chorev in Kings I 19,8 where after the powerful manifestations of other attributes, G’d, i.e. Hashem, finally appears to him as a mere whisper, was of the same kind. Ed.]
    A Midrash, aware of the tendency of people to read something negative into the relatively short list of blessings, warns us not to say that G’d did not offer many verses containing blessings but instead devoted so many verses to the list of curses and that this reflects on the preponderance of the attribute of Justice. We should note instead that the list of blessings commences with the letter א, i.e. אם בחקותי תלכו and concludes with the letter ת, i.e. the blessings cover all the letters of the aleph bet, whereas by contrast the curses begin with the letter ו and conclude with the letter ה, as if to show that they do not even cover one single whole letter of the aleph bet. It is not the number of verses which reflects the relative strength of the attribute of Mercy and the attribute of Justice but the order in which these letters are arranged, i.e. the attribute of Mercy is far greater. 
    
    26,14. ואם לא תשמעו לי, “and if you do not listen to Me, etc.” The Torah refers to the people not heeding the instruction to study Torah; it goes on to list a succession of seven different sins, each progressively more serious than the preceding one. The words ולא תעשון, “and you will not perform,” are a direct result of your failing to study Torah. The next sin which results from the previous one is that you will “despise My statutes.” The reason for this is that you do not know he reasons behind this legislation. Having reached the stage of rejecting part of My laws you will also find fault with My משפטים, social legislation, feeling revolted by them. Your negative attitude will include both such legislation involving stealing and robbery as well as regulations governing with whom you may have sexual intercourse. You, in common with the Gentiles, will find such legislation burdensome, often running counter to your natural instincts, especially when people whom you believe you love are forbidden to you as marriage partners. The Torah is aware of the impact of this legislation and this is why in verse 43, at the end of the paragraph, it repeats once more that your failure to observe these commandments is the principal cause of all the disasters predicted in this chapter. 
    When the Torah speaks about לבלתי עשות את כל מצותי, “not to perform all My commandments” (verse 15), this is not a repetition but means that not only will you not observe My commandments but you will try to prevent others from performing them, i.e. the words mean: ”so that they will not be performed.” The words: “all My commandments,” mean that you have reached the stage when you deny the validity of any of My laws. This accounts for the sixth of the seven sins we said are listed in the introduction to the warning of retributive action by G’d. Finally, the seventh sin is described as להפרכם את בריתי, “to breach My covenant,” i.e. you deny the essential tenets of Judaism. The verses 14-15 are a model lesson of the Talmudic axiom that “one sin brings another sin in its wake.”
    
    26,16. אף אני אעשה זאת לכם, “also I will do this to you.” According to the plain meaning of the text, seeing that G’d’s mode of operation in our universe is based on the principle of reciprocity, מדה כנגד מדה, G’d says: “I will bring to bear upon you seven different kinds of retributions, each in response to one of your sins.”
   את השחפת ואת הקדחת, “swelling lesions and burning fever;” these are two separate punishments; in order that these phenomena not be considered as not life-threating, the Torah adds the words מחלות עינים ומדיבות נפש, “which cause the eyes to pine and the souls to languish;” [our author would translate these words as “ruining the eyes and the soul, Ed.] When this (result) occurs this is the third of the seven retributions to be visited on the Israelites.
   וזרעתם לריק זרעכם ואכלוהו אויביכם, “you will sow your seed in vain as your enemies will consume them” (the harvest).  The fifth is ונתתי פני בכם ונגפתם, “I will set My face against you and you will be routed by your enemies.” The  sixth punishment is: “your foes will dominate you.” Finally, the seventh and last punishment is: “you shall flee though none pursues.” This then is the meaning of the words in verse 18 שבע על חטאתכם, “seven in response to your (seven) sins.” 
    There is a second set of 7 different disasters beginning with verse 19  the first of which is: “I will break your proud glory;” the glory referred to is the Holy Temple. The Temple has been referred to as גאון עזכם, ”the pride of your power,” in Ezekiel 24,21. The second disaster is described as “your skies will turn to iron;” the third that “your earth will be like copper.” The fourth in this series are the words “so that your strength will be spent to no purpose.” The fifth is described as: “your land shall not yield its produce.” The sixth and seventh are the failure of the tree to yield (either its timber) or its fruit,“ The curse on the trees is divided into two parts, a) the tree will not yield; b) fruit. The words לא יתן, “it will not yield,” are used both for the tree and its fruit as separate contributions made by trees to man’s comfort.
    The Torah continues to list yet another seven kinds of disasters as follows: 1) “I will loose wild beasts against you;” this is actually a reference to three different forms of disasters as it includes free roaming beasts, domesticated four-legged animals, and all kinds of creeping creatures; 4) “they shall bereave you of your children;” 5)  “they will kill your cattle;” 6) “they shall decimate you;” 7) they will make your roads desolate.”
    A fourth group of seven retributions begins with verse 23; it is introduced by the words: “if after all the foregoing you still have not been chastised to return to Me:” G’d now speaks about striking back at the Jewish people seven times for their sins. This group of plagues commences with 1) the avenging sword which avenges the breach of the covenant with G’d (verse 25); 2) “you will be delivered to your cities (do not venture outside);” 3) “I will send pestilence against you.” 4) “I will deliver you into he hands of your enemy.” 5) “I will break the staff of your bread” (by famine); 5) “ten women will bake bread having only one oven between them;” 6) “they will bring back your bread by weight” (sharing out merely crumbs) (verse 26). 7) “you will eat without becoming sated.”
    A fifth string of seven acts of retributions is in store for you if all the ones that have hit you thus far have failed to be effective. This string commences with verse 29: 1) eating your own children; 2) destruction of lofty buildings and decimating sun-gods. Casting your carcasses upon the carcasses of your idols; 4) “My spirit will reject you.”  5) Destruction of the cities. 6) Ruin of your temples by foreign troops. 7) refusal of G’d to accept your sacrificial offerings.
    In verse 32 the Torah speaks of: “I will make the land desolate.” This is not part of the disasters visited upon the Jewish people but it means that the conquerors will not feel at home in Eretz Yisrael after they have conquered it.
    A kabbalistic approach: the word אני, “I”, in the sequence אף אני אעשה זאת לכם in verse 16 is a reference to the attribute of Justice. In fact wherever this expression does occur when G’d is speaking it refers to that attribute of Justice. This consideration is what prompted Nachmanides to comment on verse 18  that the attribute אני is equivalent to the word זאת in that verse. The last letter ה in the tetragram alludes to this attribute, i.e. it is employed by G’d to discipline man at the time G’d is angry. This is the reason why the Torah writes in verse 18 ויספתי ליסרה אתכם, “I will continue to afflict and discipline you,” [this would be strange seeing that the Torah had not previously spoken about G’d “disciplining” the people. However, if אני and זאת are the same attribute the verse makes perfect sense. Ed.] The extra letter ה at the end of the word ליסרה instead of merely the word ליסר which we would have expected, refers to that last letter ה in the tetragram which is the allusion to the attribute of Justice in that name Hashem. It is a reduced form of the attribute of Justice. The very word ויספתי implies something additional, not part of the essence. G’d Himself used this word when He said after the deluge (Genesis 8,21) לא אוסיף לקלל עוד את האדמה, “I will not add additional curses against the earth, etc.” This was a promise not to employ the attribute of Justice in a stronger form. [G’d’s “feelings” about man’s failures have been discussed at greater length on Genesis 6,6 both in the homiletical and kabbalistic sections of our author’s commentary, compare pages 161-162 of my translation. Ed.] When David says in Psalms 27,3 אם תקום עלי מלחמה בזאת אני בוטח, the proper way to understand this verse is that: “if war breaks out against me then I rely on the limiting factor of the attribute אני which is expressed by the use of the word זאת, i.e. a reduced form of the attribute of Justice.” We find another allusion to this meaning of the added letter ה at the end of a word where we would not expect it in Maleachi 3,7: שובו אלי ואשובה אליכם, “return to Me and I shall return to you.” The word should have been אשוב. The letterה  at the end is an allusion to the reduced form of the attribute of Justice as represented by the last letter ה in the tetragram. We may therefore understand verse 18 to mean that “although I am the attribute of Justice, I do not relate to you with the full impact of Justice but restrain that attribute as is inherent in the word אני,” a reference to the reduced impact of the attribute of Justice when it is part of the tetragram, i.e. Hashem.
    As to the expression שבע על חטאתכם, normally translated as: “seven times on account of your sins,” the kabbalistic meaning is that these words were spoken by the attribute זאת, the one which had said ויסרתי, “I shall discipline,” and והכתי, “I shall strike;” this attribute is also known as שבע or בת שבע, the mother of Solomon. This is why the prophet Isaiah 50,1 said: ובפשעכם שלחה אמכם, “on account of your sins your mother was dismissed.” [Seeing that Bat Sheva, Solomon’s mother was in a state of incomplete divorce when she first encountered David, a divorce whose effectiveness depended on her husband’s not returning from war, the prophet compares her rejection, i.e. a conditional rejection, to the rejection of the Jewish people by G’d without a decree of divorce. This is presumabley why Kabbalists describe the ”weaker” state of the attribute of Justice by calling that attribute שבע or בת שבע, Ed.]
    
    26,21. ואם תלכו עמי קרי, “and if you behave casually with me, etc. This is the way a Torah-oriented Jew relates to his experiences: if he is successful in his endeavours he does not credit his astuteness with his success but sees in it an act of loving kindness by Hashem; he certainly does not think that he was so deserving an individual that G’d rewarded him for his righteousness by granting him this success. This is the Torah’s warning in Deut. 9,5: “not because of your righteousness and the uprightness of your heart are you coming to possess their land, etc.” However, if bad fortune strikes a Torah-observant Jew (or what he perceives as bad fortune), the first thing he must do is to confess his personal inadequacies and assume that the reason for his afflictions are sins which he committed; on no account is he to attribute his misfortune to “bad luck,” i.e.  to coincidence. If he were to make the mistake of doing so he will find that G’d adds more such “bad luck” as a punishment for his mistaken attitude. In other words, the mistaken notion that his fate was due to coincidence, מקרה, causes G’d to add more such מקרים"“. This is what is meant when G’d said in verse 24: “also I will behave toward you with casualness.” The Torah repeats the same sentiment in verse 28 in an accentuated form. In that instance the קרי will be an expression of G’d’s anger, חמה. It will appear as if G’d is “unloading” a measure of such coincidences on the Jew who refuses to heed the warnings expressed here.
    
    26,26. ואפו עשר נשים, “and ten women will bake (in one oven).” This number is not to be understood literally, but is an example of an unusually large number, not appropriate for the subject under discussion. We find an example of this in Job 19,3 where he said: “you humiliate me ten times.” It means that Job complained about being humiliated time and again. The reason the number “ten” is used to illustrate such concepts of something occurring frequently is because this number is the conclusion of a number of digits which are all included in it. The number “seven” has similar properties as it includes all the days of the week, a recurring phenomenon. When Solomon writes in Proverbs 24,16 that a righteous person can fall seven times and recover, this does not mean that he cannot recover an eighth time, but that he can recover after having fallen many times. The Torah describes Yaakov as prostrating himself before his brother Esau “seven times” in Genesis 33,3. The number “seven” need not be understood literally but is a metaphor for “many times.” The reason that that number has become the symbol of “many times” may be that the only sequential combination of letters in the aleph bet which  produces the number seven are the letters ג and דA combination of these two numbers as letters yields the word דג, fish, a species whose rate of multiplying is described as ישרצו, in Genesis 1,20 as “the waters shall teem with fish.” Yaakov applied this to human beings also when he blessed Joseph’s children wishing וידגו לרב בקרב הארץ, “may they increase abundantly as fish,” in Genesis 48,16. We may therefore view both the number seven and the number ten as metaphors for large numbers of something.
    
    26,31. והשמותי את מקדשיכם, “I will make your Sanctuaries desolate.” The fact that the Torah still refers to these buildings as “sanctuaries,” is to teach us that even when they have been destroyed their sites retain their original sanctity (compare Megillah 28). We read in Midrash Tehillim (11,4) “Rabbi Pedot said that regardless of the Sanctuary being operative or destroyed, the Shechinah did not depart from that site as it is written in Psalms 11,4: ה' בהיכל קדשו ה' בשמים ה' בשמים כסאו, ‘the Lord is in His holy palace, the Lord- His throne is in heaven.’” The psalmist says that although G’d is in His Sanctuary in heaven on His throne, His Shechinah is in the Sanctuary on earth. The fact that this Sanctuary retains its sanctity is derived from Kings I 9,3: “My eyes and My heart will remain there forever.” Another verse in Scripture stating the same is found in Psalms 3,5: ”He answers me from His holy mountain selah,” (forever). Even though it is now only a mountain (as opposed to a Sanctuary) it retains its sanctity, selah. Another verse having a bearing on this subject is found in Micah 4,10: “for now you must leave the city and dwell (ושכנת) in the field;” the fact that the prophet says of G’d (Shechinah) that it will continue to “dwell,” means it will be at home. [according to the author’s version of Micah, the word we have as ושכנת was spelled as ושכנתי, “I will dwell”. Ed.] This means that although the area has become as desolate as a field, the Shechinah will continue to dwell there. Rabbi Acha said that the Shechinah has never departed from the Western Wall as it is written in Song of Songs 2,9: “there He stands behind our wall.”
    
    26,32. ושממו עליה אויביכם, “your foes who dwell upon it will be desolate.” The desolation will be experienced by your enemies who will never feel comfortable in your land. This verse is good news for the Jewish people. G’d promises this in order that Jews in exile should never have to lament that seeing that they have been exiled from the Holy Land, others will now experience the pleasures to be experienced in that land. Thus far Sifra Bechukotai 6,8 on our verse. As a result the peoples who will dwell there will not engage in civilising the country which they took over as desolate; they will not wall their cities. Any nation attempting to rebuild this country will find themselves lacking in strength to do so. This is a tremendous source of encouragement for exiled Jews that the land awaits their eventual return to it before it will begin to bloom again.
    
    26,35. בשבתכם עליה, “when you used to dwell on it.”  From the words אז תרצה, “then it will be appeased,” in verse 34, up until the words בשבתכם עליה here, you will find ten references to Shemittah, in one form or another. The message is that the 70 years of exile in Babylon represented ten shemittah cycles. Seeing that the entire Torah is a string of allusions to the past and the future there is nothing surprising in this. 
    26,37. וכשלו איש באחיו, “they will stumble over one another, etc.” According to Sanhedrin 27 the Torah means that they will stumble each over the sins committed by the other, i.e. their reciprocal responsibility which they disregarded became their undoing. This is also what Moses had in mind in Deut. 29,9  when he described each Israelite as “standing upright” at that time, (i.e. not stumbling over his fellow’s sins). The example for this reciprocal responsibility was illustrated most powerfully when because of failure to admonish Achan who had taken money from the loot of Jericho declared sacred for the Temple, this sin became the cause of Israel losing its first campaign after the capture of Jericho. (compare Joshua chapter seven with special emphasis on verse 11) [Contrary to Moses who had asked G’d in connection with Korach why the sin of one man should cause G’d’s anger against a whole nation, in Achan’s case G’d spelled out that it did. Ed.] G’d tells Joshua that “Israel has sinned;” He did not tell him that “an Israelite had sinned.” The whole nation was held responsible for the sin of an individual. An accessory after the fact, i.e. someone who does not admonish the sinner has made himself his partner. Seeing that what Achan had done could not have been concealed completely, there had already been many accessories.
    This incident prompted the sages in Shir Hashirim Rabbah 6,16 to comment that the use of the word "nut” in אל גנת האגוז ירדתי, “I went down to the nut-grove” (Song of Songs 6,11), describes that just as it is impossible to pluck one walnut without making the whole tree shake, so it is impossible for an individual to commit a sin without ripples of what he did affecting the entire Jewish people. This is what had bothered Moses in Numbers 16,22: “one man sinned and You are angry at the whole congregation!”
    
    26,41. ואז ירצו את עונם, “and then they shall atone for their iniquity.”  This verse served the sages in Mechilta Bachodesh 10 as proof that afflictions suffered achieve atonement for the victim just as sacrifices offered achieve atonement; the word ירצו here and the same root used in connection with the sacrificial offerings, i.e. נרצה, is proof that the purpose and effect of such offerings is the same (Leviticus 1,4). Here the Torah speaks about afflictions suffered by the body, in Leviticus 1,4 the “physical affliction’s” equivalent is the financial expense involved in buying the animal which is killed.
    
    26,42. וזכרתי את בריתי יעקב, “I shall remember My covenant with Yaakov, etc.” Here the Torah lists the names of the patriarchs in the reverse order of their historical roles. The reason for this, according to the plain meaning of the text, is that Yaakov was mentioned first so that if the (unexpired) merit of Yaakov sufficed to activate G’d’s attribute of Mercy the merits of the other patriarchs, i.e. our spiritual capital, would not have to be invoked. If the sins to be offset by the merits of the patriarchs were greater than the combined unused merits of Yaakov, G’d promises to also invoke the merits of Yitzchak, and failing this the merits of Avraham. The expression “I will remember,” is used only in connection with Yaakov and Avraham; G’d does not need to “remember” the merits of Yitzchak as the heap of ashes of the ram burned in his stead is constantly present in G’d’s eye (compare Rashi).
    A Midrashic approach (found in Vayikra Rabbah 36,4): when mentioning the memory of Avraham and Yitzchak the Torah adds the word אף to signify that both these patriarchs had also sired and raised an Ishmael and Esau respectively, thus causing G’d to become angry; in connection with Yaaov that word is missing seeing all his children remained true to their father’s teaching, to Torah-values. 
    The Torah has listed the merits of the patriarchs. How do we know that G’d will also invoke the merits of the four matriarchs? These are alluded to by the extra word את before mention of the word בריתי, “My covenant.” The word את describing the matriarchs is not unique in our verse. We find this word as referring to three of the matriarchs when Yaakov tells his sons that these three matriarchs had been buried either by him or his forefather in the cave of Machpelah (compare Genesis 47,31). This is also confirmed by Sifra Bechukotai 8,8. 
    Personally, I believe that the word אף used in connection with G’d remembering Yitzchak and Avraham respectively is an allusion to the attribute of Justice such as in Genesis 18,23 האף תספה צדיק עם רשע. Both Avraham and Yitzchak had an equal part in the binding of Yitzchak, each one of them suppressing their natural instincts; Avraham suppressed the father’s instinct by demonstrating obedience to G’d and being prepared to slaughter his son, whereas Yitzchak suppressed the natural survival instinct by not challenging his father who made him the victim of G’d’s commandment and by submitting to being slaughtered. When the Torah wrote on that occasion (Genesis 22,6) “they both walked together,” the point of that statement is to show that both father and son shared equally in that merit, they both had the same thing in mind, namely to submit to the attribute of Justice.
    In our verse the name Yaakov is spelled with the extra letter ו, something quite unusual which we find only on five occasions in the entire Bible. This corresponds to five other places in the Bible where the name Elijah, normally spelled as אליהו is spelled with the letter ו at the end of his name missing, i.e. as אליה. According to Rashi what all this means is that Yaakov took a letter from Elijah’s name as a guarantee, as collateral, that the prophet would make an appearance on earth announcing the advent of the redemption of the Jewish people.
    Another Midrashic comment (Vayikra Rabbah 36,4) relates to why the Torah mentions the merit of the earth, i.e. the soil of the Holy Land, as a factor in evoking the attribute of Mercy. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish explains this by means of a parable. A king had three daughters who were being raised by one female governess. Whenever he inquired after the welfare of his daughters, he added that they should also concern themselves with how that governess was faring. Thus far the Midrash. In other words, the Holy land is our governess and contributes much to the welfare of the Jewish people.
    Looked at with a little more sophistication, the three בנות, daughters, in that parable are metaphors for the attributes and merits of the patriarchs.
    A kabbalistic approach: The reason that the Torah mentions Yaakov first in the list of the patriarchs is because he represented the attribute זכור which is an alternate name for the attribute of Mercy. The Torah wanted to arrange the attributes (or emanations) in ascending order. There are a total of seven such attributes of which Yaakov represents four, i.e. he is always perceived as accompanied by two עמודי שמים, heavenly pillars, plus the קו האמצעי, the centre “line” of the diagram of emanations (which we mentioned many times). This “centre line” which also reconciles the left and right side of the emanations, is represented here by the additional letter ו in Yaakov’s name. Then there are the attributes represented by Avraham and Yitzchak (one each) plus the earth (Eretz Yisrael) which completes the seventh attribute. Each one of the patriarchs is described by the Torah as “My covenant” [a reference to the patriarchs in their functions as the celestial counterparts of the physical patriarchs we are familiar with. Ed. ]. The land of Israel which formed part of the covenant G’d concluded with each of the patriarchs is an integral part of that “covenant” and this is why it is mentioned here.
    We find this order of the attributes alluded to more clearly in Deuteronomy 4,37 where Moses said: ויוציאך בפניו בכחו הגדול ממצרים, normally translated simply as: “He took you out before Him with His great strength from Egypt.” [According to the Kabbalists these adjectives have more profound meaning, hence the author explains. Ed.] The word בפניו is a reference to Yaakov as we know from Psalms 24,6 מבקשי פניך יעקב סלה, “those who seek Your Presence, Yaakov, forever.” The word בכחו in that verse in Deut. refers to Yitzchak, [traditionally a symbol of גבורה, strength. Ed.] whereas the word הגדול refers to Avraham .
    Another reason why Yaakov has been mentioned first in the list of the patriarchs is in order for the attribute כבוד to look first at the image engraved in the chayot of the מרכבה, and thereby evoke feelings of mercy toward the Jewish people. [I suppose the reference is to the often mentioned tradition that Yaakov’s features are engraved on the throne of G’d in the celestial regions. Ed.] The reason that Yaakov’s name here is spelled with the extra letter ו is a reference to the fact that he represents the sixth of the emanations, תפארת, harmony. This letter is also one found in the tetragram. [At this point the author refers to details of the vision of Ezekiel in chapter one of his book, in speculations about the four chayot mentioned having four faces each, etc. I have omitted this as it is of interest only to advanced students of Kabbalah. Ed.] In order to avoid any misunderstanding, (author ‘s words), the Midrash which referred to the patriarchs as “daughters being raised by a governess” does not understand the reference to the patriarchs as to their celestial counterparts but as being to Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov as we know them as the ancestors of the Jewish nation. 
    
    26,44. ואף גם זאת, “But in spite of all this, etc.” according to the plain meaning of the text the Torah assures us that even when the Jewish people will be in exile G’d will not despise them there but will keep His covenant with them. 
    A Midrashic approach based on Sifra quoted presently: the word זאת refers to the Torah in which it is written וזאת התורה, “this” is the Torah (Deut. 4,44). The verse is a hint that the Torah will not depart from the Jewish people when they are in exile. This promise is parallel to a similar promise by Moses in Deut. 31,21 כי לא תשכח מפי זרעו, “she will not be forgotten from the mouth of its offspring.” Our sages in Sifra Bechukotai 8,10 used this verse to say that the only thing which the Jewish people will retain of all their former glory and which will ensure that they are not totally despised is the Torah. If this had been taken from them also they would be entitled to claim that G’d had totally despised them and been revolted by them.
   לא מאסתים, “I do not despise them.” This is a reference to exile under Emperor Vespasianus.
   ולא געלתים, “and I do not reject them,” during the days of the Greek dominance of the land of Israel.
   לכלותם להפר בריתי אתם, “to annul My covenant with them.” This is a reference to the time of Haman.
   כי אני ה' אלוהיהם, “for I am the Lord their G’d.” This refers to the period known as Gog and Magog. This is a period when no creature will be able to dominate or rule over the Israelites. When you review this whole paragraph starting with the words ואם לא תשמעו in verse 14 until the conclusion of verse 43, you will find that it contains 390 words. This is the total number of years that the tribes sinned in the land of Israel prior to heir being exiled. The period commenced with the declaration in Samuel II 20,1: “we do not have a share in David nor a common inheritance with the son of Yishai.” [This was Sheva ben Bichri’s call to rebellion against the Kingdom of David and occurred during the last years of David’s reign. Ed.] You will find that in Chronicles I 16,16 the word יצחק in the reference to ושבועתו ליצחק, is spelled with the letter ש instead of the letter צ, thus hinting at 390 years after which that oath that the land of Canaan would belong to the descendants of Yitzchak might expire. [the commonly accepted text of the Bible does not show that letter ש, though I have found that in Cassel’s version of comparative spellings in the Bible it is given as an alternate spelling. Ed.] It is assumed that G’d had sworn to Yitzchak that if his descendants would not sin for more than 390 years He would not decree exile for them. This is also alluded to in Ezekiel 4,5-6: “and I will impose upon you 390 days (years), corresponding to the days of their guilt; and so you shall bear the guilt for the House of Israel. When you have completed these, you shall lie another forty years on your right side, and bear the guilt of the House of Yehudah. One day for each year I impose upon you.”
    A kabbalistic approach: The words ואף גם זאת are meant to include the כנסת ישראל the spiritual concept of the people of Israel. [the word אף then is understood as “also.” Ed.] The כנסת ישראל is known as זאת, as we know from Psalms 118,23 מאת ה' היתה זאת, “the כנסת ישראל emanated from the Lord,” (as well as from Genesis 49,28), and the verse would contain a promise  that wherever the physical people of Israel would be exiled to an element of the Shechinah would remain with them. This is the deeper meaning of the words in verse 44: “I will not despise them and reject them to the point of totally destroying them.” This idea is also reflected in the hymn composed by Assaph (Psalms 80,15) “look down from heaven and see; take note of this (זאת) vine.” The words “look down from heaven and see,” are similar to Kings I 8, 32 ואתה תשמע השמים, “and You will listen (to the prayer) from heaven.” The words ופקד גפן זאת, “and take note of this vine,” should be understood as “and take not of the vine of זאת,” i.e. of theכנסת ישראל  known as זאת. 
    Among his other words Assaph also explained here that this vine known as זאת is well known through the wickedness referred to in verse 14 of the same Psalm as חזיר מיער, where the letter ע is suspended. The suspension of that letter is supposed to allude to the religion of the Romans. I have already mentioned this in connection with Genesis 36,31 about the kings of the Kingdom of Edom who preceded the first Jewish king. (see verse 39 there commencing with the words: “A Midrashic approach” page 539 my translation. Ed.).
    Remember that according to the Kabbalists there is a considerable difference between the meaning of the word גם and the word אף although both are used as forms of “also.” The word אף always refers to the addition of the attribute of Justice, whereas the word גם refers to the addition of the attribute of Mercy. The word גם is perceived as an abbreviation of the word גמילות חסדים, “performance of deeds of loving kindness.” One such example would be found in Genesis 30 6 וגם שמע בקולי, “and He also listened to my voice (in prayer, Rachel speaking).” According to this we may understand the words ואף גם זאת as a combination of the attribute of Justice and the attribute of Mercy as represented by the attribute זאת.
    
    26,45. וזכרתי להם ברית ראשונים, “I will remember for their benefit the covenant with the ancients, etc.” After the Torah had mentioned the word וזכרתי in verse 42 referring to the three elder patriarchs who are already in the celestial regions, the Torah now applies the same wording to the covenants concluded with the people at Mount Sinai both in connection with the first and the second set of Tablets; it assures the Jewish people that the promises inherent in those covenants will also not be nullified by G’d entirely. The latter covenants are the ones concluded with the יוצאי מצרים, the participants in the Exodus from Egypt as opposed to the “earlier” ones referred to as ראשונים. This is why the Torah added here
   אשר הוצאתי אותם מארץ מצרים לעיני הגוים להיות להם לאלוהים אני ה', “whom I took out of the land of Egypt in full view of all the nations, in order to be and remain their G’d, I am the Lord.”  it is as if the Torah had added: “and in order to say to them at Mount Sinai: “I am the Lord your G’d who has taken you out of Egypt from the house of bondage, etc.” (Exodus 20,2).
    A kabbalistic approach: the words ברית ראשונים, refer to the covenant with the first three emanations, the “first” ones compared to the following seven emanations. Grammatically, this is a construction similar to the one in Job 15,7 הראשון אדם תולד, “are you the first human being ever born?” [the point is that the word ראשון does not have to mean the objectively first, but is a word used relative to other, even identical phenomena which become manifest later in time. Ed.] Seeing that the Torah had mentioned the three “elder” patriarchs not in their genealogical order (compare verse 42) and I had explained that though three patriarchs are mentioned by name that the verse spoke of seven different attributes (emanations), now that the Torah again uses the term וזכרתי, “I will remember,” it refers to the fact that there had been a previous “remembrance” of the patriarchs in order to complete the בנין, the structure [of the six emanations חסד, גבורה, תפארת, נצח ,הוד ,יסוד, which had been not yet been accounted for in the first וזכרתי].
    Furthermore, the attribute of Mercy which was alluded to in the extra letter ו in the spelling of the name יעקוב, which is part of the seven attributes alluded to in that verse, is an aspect of the attribute of Mercy which also contains part of the attribute of Justice. In order to reassure the people in exile, G’d promises here that He will particularly remember the first set of “remembrance” in which the attribute of Mercy was portrayed as “self-sufficient,” not diluted through incorporating part of the attribute of Justice. Such an assurance was deemed necessary at this point seeing that the attribute which took the people out of Egypt was the attribute אני, a form of the attribute of Justice, and the declared objective was “to be their אלוהים, G’d,” as the attribute of Justice.
    
    27,2. איש כי יפליא נדר, “a man who articulates a vow, etc.”  The Torah deliberately did not write כי ידר נדר “who vows a vow,” but כי יפליא. That word is an allusion to the attribute (emanation) חכמה; it is generally understood that though נדר is a derivative of the emanation חכמה, it ranks below “mature” חכמה of a fully adult person. Our sages who have ranked certain people in order of their outstanding attributes and claim to greatness (Horiot 13) have listed the attribute of wisdom as greater than the authority wielded by a king of Israel, so that when there is not enough money to buy the freedom from captivity of both, the sage has to be redeemed with the first available funds. The נדר, “vow,” ranks higher than the oath, as the former overrides other command- ments (in certain circumstances, or at least needs to be annulled seeing it is theoretically effective) whereas the oath not to observe a Torah commandment has no legal meaning at all. The expression יפליא in connection with נדר as opposed to שבועה oath, is alluded to by the word יפליא.
   בערכך נפשות, “regarding valuation of living human beings.” Rashi writes that the word ערכך is to be understood as similar to ערך, “valuation.” The reason that there is another letter ך added Rashi does not know how to explain.
    According to the plain meaning this legislation dealing with valuations is a further aspect of the legislation concerning the Yovel  year. In fact the word יובל is specifically mentioned in verse 23 in connection with the return of ancestral land which had been “donated” under the heading of “sanctifying it” for the Temple Treasury.
    Basically speaking, the term ערך describes a valuation in monetary terms. When somebody, for instance, promises to give to the Temple Treasury, the equivalent of a certain vital part of his body, such as the head or the heart, he has to pay to the Temple Treasury the amount fixed by the Torah for his entire body (depending on his age-group and sex) seeing that he would not be able to continue living if he lacked the part of his body he had “donated,” or “sanctified” for the Temple Treasury.
    When setting the amounts for such valuations, the Torah does not distinguish between rich and poor, socially prominent or socially insignificant individuals, but assesses everyone strictly on the basis of age and sex.
    A Midrashic approach based on Tanchuma Bechukotai 6: the termבערכך נפשות , “according to the valuation of living beings,” the Torah portrays G’d as saying that “if you donate to Me the monetary equivalent of your person I will account it for you as if you had ‘donated’ to Me your lives, your souls.”
    G’d is reported as saying to the Jewish people: “through the merit acquired by donating your valuations, I will save you from the corresponding evaluation to be judged in Gehinom.” This concept is based on Isaiah 30,33 כי ערוך מאתמול תפתה, “the Topheth=Gehinom has been made ready for him since ‘yesterday (long ago).’” [I believe the author means that seeing that purgatory lies in wait for man and the word used is ערך, it is appropriate to counterbalance it with a positive ערך prior to one’s death. Ed.] Moreover, G’d says that instead of readying for us a place in purgatory He readies for us a place at the table described by David in Psalms 23,5 ”You spread a table for me in full view of my enemies,” another verse where the verb ערך is used to describe the ‘making ready’ of the table. Thus far Tanchuma.
    As to the word בערכך instead of as בערך, it is part of the rules of grammar that the letter כ is frequently added at the beginning or in the middle of a word. It is not surprising to find this letter at the end of a word. As an example of what has just been said look at the words אני and אנכי respectively. Both words mean “I.” At the beginning of a word the letter כ is generally added to describe a comparison such as in Genesis 3,5 והייתם כאלוהים, “and you will be just like G’d.”  Or, Exodus 4,7 והנה שבה כבשרו, “and here it had reverted to look like his (ordinary) flesh.” At the end of a word we find the letter כ added in such expressions as כערכך הכהן in verse 12 of our chapter.
    A kabbalistic approach: I believe that the addition of the letter ך is an allusion to the כסא הכבוד, G’d’s throne of the attribute of כבוד which is perceived as shaped somewhat similar to the letter ך a letter which strives in an upward direction as if asking G’d to take His seat upon it. Concerning these appearances of the letters of the aleph bet, Rabbi Akiva said that the letter ך stood in front of the Lord and said: “I wish that You will employ me when creating the universe, seeing they call me ‘Your throne, Your crown, Your pseudonyms.’” In response to this request the word כסא was based on the letter כ.
    Seeing that the chayot described in Ezekiel chapter 1 and 10 as well as in Isaiah chapter 6 are depicted as upholding this throne of G’d you will understand the mystical dimension of Psalms 139,5 אחור וקדם צרתני ותשת עלי כפכה, “You have given me the same shape in the back and in the front; You lay Your hand (palm) upon me.” The word כפכה in that verse may be understood as if it had been spelled כף שלך. It is well known [to Kabbalists, Ed.] that the root of the spiritual soul originates in (at) the throne of G’d, and when the Torah writes here בערכך נפשות לה', this is an allusion to the “value” of the throne of G’d, as if the Torah had written that the person donating his value had in mind “the value of his soul as evaluated by G’d’s throne” (the attribute כבוד). Picture the word spelled as two words, i.e. בערך ך. In other words, the souls are perceived as supporting the throne, as part of the concept called מרכבה. Perhaps this helps us understand a statement of a Midrash in Shir Hashirim zutta 1,16 that “three entered, one more deeply than the next one; Moses, for it is written of him that ‘Moses approached the deep cloud’ (Exodus 20,18). Beyond Moses, righteousness and justice penetrated closer to the throne of G’d as we know from Psalms 89,15 צדק ומשפט מכון כסאך, ‘righteousness and justice are the base of Your throne;’ beyond even these attributes the souls of the righteous penetrated to an even closer position around G’d’s throne as we know from Job 12,10 אשר בידו נפש כל חי, ‘in His hand is every living soul.’” Another verse expressing a similar sentiment is found in Samuel I 25,29, (Abigail speaking) “the life of my lord will be bound up in the bundle of life in the care of the Lord your G’d.” 
    In our verse you find that he word for “souls in the plural” i.e. בערכך נפשות is spelled without the letter ו which should be there. This is a clear indication that not all the souls “belong to,” i.e. “will return to” the Lord after their life on earth. This is also what Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai referred to when he said in Sukkah 45 “I have seen the souls which are scheduled for elevation and they are very few in number.”
    
    27,3. מבן עשרים שנה ועד בן ששים שנה, “from twenty years and up until sixty years of age, etc.” Actually, the order in which the ages are listed here should have read: “from one month to five years old; from five years old to twenty years; from twenty years old to sixty years; from sixty years old and older, in the case of a male, followed by the parallel rules about the ages of females donating their “valuation” to G’d.” However, seeing that the whole paragraph began with the word איש, i.e. an adult male, the Torah listed the ages in a different order. After all, it would hardly do to describe a month old baby, or even a five year old boy as איש. Furthermore, these minors would hardly put a valuation on themselves, “donating” themselves to G’d, or to the “Temple Treasury.” The only way such minors will be involved in this legislation at all is when an adult declares that the valuation of a boy (or girl) between 30 days and five years of age, or a boy between the ages of 5 years and 20 years  will be the amount he (the adult) will give to the Temple Treasury. Seeing the Torah had commenced this paragraph by using the valuation of a twenty year old male as an example, it had to list the other age groups  in the order it did (compare Nachmanides).
    
    27,8. ואם מך הוא מערכך, “If he is too poor for the valuation, etc.;” on this verse our sages in Erchin 24 say that though the property of the person who vowed to pay this valuation is subject to seizure for the purpose of payment, the bailiff must allow him to retain sufficient chattels and tools, etc., to be able to sustain himself and earn his livelihood. By being deprived of the excess he is deemed to have discharged his vow. He does not have to make payments in the future to settle the part of his debt to the Temple Treasury  he has not paid yet. This ruling applies even if in the interval he has become wealthy (Maimonides Hilchot Erchin 3,7). 
    The procedure here is similar to an ordinary debtor who claims that he is unable to pay his debts. A person deputised for this by the court enters the debtor’s home and assesses what there is that is saleable leaving him the aforementioned items as his minimum subsistence level. According to the Talmud Baba Metzia 114 this is based on an allusion in the Torah i.e. that the word מך appears in connection with ordinary debts as well as here. Seeing that an ordinary debtor is allowed to retain the necessities of life if he cannot repay the whole debt, the same applies here. (compare Leviticus 25,35 where the Torah commands that we must assist the impoverished Jew). [The type of comparison is called a גזרה שוה, similar language in dissimilar subject matter so that there is not really a conceptual linkage. Ed.] The Talmudic expression for allowing the debtor to retain part of his belongings is known as מסדרין.
    There is a difference between the ordinary debtor and the person whose economic circumstances are being assessed by a priest in our paragraph. When personal belongings of the ordinary debtor have been taken as collateral by the bailiff they have to be returned when the owner needs them, such as his pyamas at night. Such a consideration does not apply to the person whose ability to discharge his vow is being assessed by the priest in our paragraph. The reason for this difference is mentioned on the folio of Baba Metzia we quoted. In connection with the legislation concerning collateral the Torah writes that in recognition of returning his nightgown to him the impoverished debtor will bless the lender (Deut. 24,13 and Exodus 22,25). According to the Talmud, the legislation that the pawn must be returned for use by the debtor applies only to creditors in need of blessings. Seeing that the Temple Treasury is not in need of such blessings nothing is to be gained by the pawn going back and forth every night. In connection with this kind of reasoning the question is raised in the Talmud: “does not the Torah write explicitly that when we have eaten and been sated that we must “bless the Lord your G’d” (who has provided us with all this) (Deut. 8,10). Since when does G’d need our blessing? Surely this proves that even the Temple Treasury could use our blessing! The Talmud answers that it is not the blessing mentioned in that verse that determines this but the end of the verse which concludes by saying that the matter will be accounted as an act of righteousness for the party returning the pawn. This is certainly not the case with the Temple Treasury. People who are in need of the merit of having performed acts of righteousness are the subject of the legislation to return a pawn at the time the owner needs it; the Temple Treasury which has no such need does not return collateral for the use of the debtor. G’d the owner of the Temple Treasury dispenses righteousness as He has all that He needs. He does not need to acquire title to it.
    27,8-23. The word הכהן, “the Priest,” occurs a total of ten times in the course of these verses.  Our sages in Megillah 23 say that actually that just as when you redeem land you need a quorum of ten people to be present at that occasion, one of whom is a Priest, in order to make the valuation of that piece of land legally valid, so the same applies to the valuation of people (when they had donated the equivalent of their monetary value to the Temple Treasury, as opposed to ערכין where the Torah stipulated the same valuation for people of a certain age group). The Talmud arrives at that ruling by saying that out of the ten times the word הכהן appears here, the first time it is needed to establish the principle that a Priest has an indispensable function here. The other times are all meant to exclude something. We have a principle that if there is more than one exclusion, i.e. if the word which serves as an exclusion occurs more times than necessary this exclusion turns into an inclusion. This is why the Talmud concludes that the nine extra times the word הכהן appears here includes up to nine ordinary Israelites as admissible in that quorum of ten Jews one of whom must be a Priest. 
    
    27,10. לא יחליפנו ולא ימיר אותו טוב ברע או רע בטוב, “he shall not exchange it or substitute it, good for bad or bad for good.” According to Maimonides Hilchot Temurah 4,13 the reason for this legislation is that the Torah explored the psyche of the donor down to its ultimate depth. At the core of a human being, even the finest, there may still be lying in wait for him the evil urge. Even though the person in question made these vows entirely voluntarily, not in response to any pressure, he may yet at some time or other rue having made such a vow. His first attempt at getting out of his obligation would be to exchange the animal designated for the altar with an inferior one. Seeing that the animal he sanctified was suitable as an offering, the sanctity becomes part of its body and it cannot be exchanged. This is why the Torah stated flat out that such an animal as described in our verse לא יחליפנו, cannot be traded at all. If the Torah were to permit the donor to upgrade the animal in question, it would not be long before people would abuse such a rule and they would start downgrading it for an inferior beast. If the donor violated this legislation by substituting, not only would he not gain thereby but he is punished by the Torah which states that the substitute will also become sanctified thus depriving the donor of both animals.
   והיה הוא ותמורתו קדש, “and both it (the original) and its substitute will remain sacred.” Keeping in mind the reason Maimonides advanced for this legislation, we can now understand why the Torah demanded that if someone who had sanctified his house for the Temple Treasury [a lesser degree of sanctity as the house could not be offered as an offering on the altar, Ed.] and he wants to redeem it from the Temple treasurer offering to pay for it, must add 25% as a premium to its value. The Torah’s reading of our minds allows for the fact that we may change our minds. In order to remind us that such a change of mind is not appreciated, the Torah imposes a price on that privilege of a person to change his mind (compare Nachmanides).
    
    27,26. אך בכור אשר יבכר לה' בבהמה לא יקדיש איש אותו, “However, a firstborn that will become a firstling for Hashem among livestock, a man shall not sanctify it.” This verse teaches that one must not change the status of animals which have become designated as a specific offering for the altar. For instance, if an animal had been designated to be offered as a burnt-offering, one must not change its status and offer it as a peace-offering. Neither must one (upgrade) an animal designated as a peace-offering to be offered as a sin-offering. This rule applies across the board. Sifra Bechukotai 8,3 adds that from our text I have proof for this rule only if the animal in question had been a frstling, i.e. consecrated from birth. How do we know that this rule also applies to animals which had not been consecrated by birth? We derive this from the extra words לא יקדיש אותו, בבהמה which the Torah wrote in our verse. The word בבהמה in that sequence is not needed and serves as the lesson that no beast which had once been sanctified for the altar may be reclassified. 
    
    27,29. כל חרם אשר יחרם מן האדם לא יפדה, מות יומת, “Any condemned person who has been banned from mankind shall not be redeemed; he shall be executed.” According to Rashi if someone vows the valuation of a person on the way to execution to the Temple Treasury, this vow is meaningless in legal terms. He is as if he had not said anything at all. He does not have to pay as a person under sentence of death does not have the value described in the early part of our chapter. Seeing this is so, he could not be subject to redemption. He has neither objective nor subjective monetary value.
    Nachmanides disagrees saying that the plain meaning of our verse is that anyone who declares something which belongs to him as חרם, segregated property (compare verse 28), such property remains consecrated to the Lord, regardless of the object of that declaration being man, beast, or field, even his ancestral field. In practice, such property is transferred to the priests and is not subject to redemption. However, if the person in question consecrated somebody who does not belong to him, such as a prisoner of war, it is clear that he did not intend to make this property over to the priests. An example illustrating this would be Numbers 21,2 where the Israelites vowed to Hashem: “if He will deliver this people into my hand, I will consecrate their cities.” Clearly, what was behind this vow was not to give these cities to the priests but that the Israelites vowed not to make secular use of any of the loot to be found there. It implies that everything conquered is out of bounds for use and that all the prisoners, livestock, etc., have to be killed, for instance.
    Our verse serves as the halachic basis for the ruling that if the king or the Sanhedrin, the Supreme Court, which is legally entitled to declare חרמים declares a city as subject to such a ban, violating such a decree is punishable by death. This is the reason that the men of Yavesh Gilead who had ignored the oath of the entire Jewish people by not appearing at Mitzpah (Judges 21,10) made themselves guilty of the death penalty. This was also the reason why Yonathan, son of King Shaul who had ignored the order by his father not to taste anything prior to victory (Samuel I 14,44) was technically guilty of death when he tasted some honey, although he had been unaware of the prohibition by his father the King.
    When the Book of Samuel tells us that the people redeemed Yonathan (saved his life from execution) on that day, the only reason this was possible was because he had been unaware of transgressing such an order by the Commander-in-Chief (compare  verse 45 in Samuel I  chapter 14). Targum Yonathan makes this clear when he translates that “it was clear to G’d that Yonathan had not been aware of committing an infraction.”
    Having established all this we can appreciate what a grave error Yiftach committed when he sacrificed his daughter as a burnt-offering in fulfillment of his vow that if he would return from war victorious he would offer the first creature that came out of his house as a sacrifice to the Lord (Judges 11,31). Legally, his daughter had not even become consecrated as to her monetary value. Yiftach thought that seeing he had the authority of a King, any חרם he declared was irrevocable as indicated by our verse. His conduct in the matter only revealed that he was very ignorant as our sages mentioned in Bereshit Rabbah 60,5 that he was too proud to go to Pinchas to have his vow annulled. We must not be misled by Ibn Ezra who claims that the words of his vow: “I will offer it as a burnt-offering to the Lord,” was intended as a condition, i.e. if the animal in question is suitable as an offering, whereas that if the creature would be a human being that he would isolate him or her for the rest of their natural lives. According to Ibn Ezra this is what Yiftach did, i.e. he built her a house away from civilisation where she had to live as a hermit. According to that interpretation the words והיה לה', and the words   עולה are to be understood as alternatives, so that Yiftach had covered himself against either eventuality. Our author quotes Nachmanides  who rejects this interpretation attributed to Ibn Ezra [which is not found in Judges which has no commentary of his, Ed.]. According to Torah law no man has the right to decree on another, including his daughter, that if the creature he has vowed as sacrifice is not suitable that such a creature has to live out its life in seclusion instead. Moreover, even Channah, who offered the as yet unconceived Samuel as “belonging” to G’d, did not mean anything beyond that he should spend his life as a servant of the Lord (Samuel I 1,11). Moreover, we would not be able to explain the four days a year that Yiftach’s daughter supposedly entertained her friends lamenting her fate for not having a normal life with a husband (Judges 11,40). It is far more likely that the true meaning of what happened is that Yiftach did sacrifice his daughter after having given her two months to get used to the idea. This is the opinion of Nachmanides.
    A Midrashic approach  based on Tanchuma Bechukotai 5. The words of Solomon in Proverbs 11,30: “the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, a wise man captivates people,” are based on Proverbs 3,18 that Torah is “a tree of life to those who grasp her.” In other words, even, if a man is righteous this is meaningless unless he uses the Torah as his guiding light. You find that Yiftach only lost his daughter because he did not study Torah. Torah study enables a person to know how to preserve other people’s lives, i.e. to “captivate people.” The author reviews the story in the Book of Judges concluding that on the one hand Yiftach was punished for being too proud to go to the High Priest Pinchas and have his vow annulled, whereas the High Priest was punished by losing his holy spirit and his bones not coming to proper burial as the Book of Judges describes him as being buried in the cities of Gilead (not in a single city).
    
    27,32. תחת השבט, “beneath the rod.” The legislation to tithe the tenth animal born in one’s flock applies only to animals which were not purchased by the owner of the flock but were born of his flock. The legislation does not apply to flocks owned in partnership either (Bechorot 56). The same halachah applies to the requirement to give the firstborn male animals in one’s flock to the priest. At least this is the opinion of Rabbi Ilai who says that if the mother animal is owned jointly there is no need to give the firstborn male animal to the priest. These opinions are based on the expressions בקרך, “your cattle,” (sing.) and בצאנך, “your flock,” (sing) in Deut. 15,19. If someone had purchased sheep in the market he is not obligatd to either tithe them or give the firstlings to the priest. Our sages in Sotah 27, commenting on Leviticus 22,27, use the various examples named in that verse as the basis for ruling that animals born of animals which crossbred such as a billy-goat with a sheep, or which were not born but came into this world through caesarean section are not subject to this legislation. Such expressions as שור או כשב או עז כי יולד, “ox or sheep or goat which are born,” are all dissected to yield these halachot. Expressions such as “it has to remain with its mother for seven days,” (ibid.) are interpreted to mean that animals orphaned at birth are not subject to the legislation discussed here, all because both here and in chapter 22 the decisive consideration is the animal’s being suitable as a sacrifice at that time. Seeing that an animal whose mother died at birth can never fulfil the condition of spending seven days on earth during the lifetime of its mother and can therefore not qualify as a potential sacrifice, its owner is also not subject to the legislation described by the Torah in our paragraph.
   העשירי יהיה קדש לה', “the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord.” In this instance the word “holy” means that it’s blood and the usual fat parts are offered as a sacrifice on the altar. The meat may be eaten by the owners, it is not given to the priests. The reason is that the animal tithes are not part of the 24 categories of gifts for the priests listed in Numbers 18,9-19. It is forbidden for the owner of such animals to sell them if they are unblemished, i.e. suitable as offerings, seeing that the Torah wrote in verse 33  לא יגאל, “it must not be redeemed.” Although this implies that the proceeds would be used for some sacred purpose, the prophets have taught us that selling in the normal way is also forbidden (Maimonides Hilchot Bechorot 6,5). The fistborn male animal not mentioned here is also subject to the same rulse as the tithes. Even though the firstling, as distinct from the animal tithes, is part of the 24 categories of gifts set aside for the priests so that it automatically may not be sold, the priest is not allowed to sell that animal after he has been given it, seeing it was scheduled as an offering on the altar. He offers it as a sacrifice, sprinkles the blood on the altar and burns the requisite parts and eats the meat. Maimonides states explicitly that both the firstling and the animal tithe undergo the same procedures (Maasseh Hakorbanot 5,17). Both types of animals come under the heading קדשים קלים, animals of a lesser degree of sanctity.
    A kabbalistic approach: the words העשירי יהיה קדש לה' ראשית are to be read together as a single sequence to convey the point made often that the number ten is something “sacred” almost by definition. By adding the word ראשית, a reference to the firstling, the Torah informs us of what Maimonides codified, i.e. that the concept of the firstling and that of the animal tithe, i.e. the tenth animal are inextricably related to one another.
    
    27,34. אלה המצות אשר צוה ה' את משה אל בני ישראל בהר סיני, “These are the commandments  which the Lord commanded Moses for the Children of Israel at Mount Sinai.” In the Jerusalem Talmud Shabbat 13,3 Rabbi Ilah comments on the words אלה המצות in our verse that if the Israelites will perform these commandments in accordance with the rules applying to them, i.e. “as commandments,” then they are מצות, if not they are not accounted as מצות.
    Our sages in Sifra Bechukotai 13,7 use these words as the basis for the principle that no prophet is allowed to add (permanently) another commandment to the Torah over and above the ones that have been recorded. They understand the words אשר צוה ה' את משה as a hint that G’d did not need any messenger beyond Moses to communicate His laws to the people. [in other words seeing that no prophet will attain the stature of Moses no other prophet would be entrusted with new and additional legislation. I suspect these are interpretations aimed at the Christians who see Jesus as superseding Moses and updating the Torah. Ed.] The words אל בני ישראל are understood as “as an opportunity for the Israelites to acquire merits by performing the commandments.” The words בהר סיני, are a reminder that all of these commandments were promulgated at Mount Sinai. Thus far Sifra. The point of that Midrash is that the headline אלה המצות was intended by the Torah to tell us that these commandments are of a permanent nature, effective throughout the generations. The word אלה has a connotation of pointing at something enduring indefinitely. One such example is the verse (Genesis 2,4) אלה תולדות השמים הארץ, “these are the developments of heaven and earth,” both phenomena which endure indefinitely. We find the word אלה applied also to the Jewish people in Numbers 2,32, indicating that they, just as heaven and earth, will endure indefinitely. 
    Basically, our verse tells us who commanded all these laws and who was the man who conveyed them to the Jewish people, to whom he conveyed them and where G’d had spoken to Moses “face to face.” First the Torah speaks about the commandments themselves to indicate that they rank highest in the matters discussed here, a reminder that the people had had a visual and aural revelation of an attribute of the Lord while they were at Mount Sinai. They saw manifestations which resulted from G’d’s descending on the mountain, the fire, the smoke, etc., and they heard G’d’s voice out of the fire. The purpose of these manifestations was primarily to make G’d’s messenger, Moses, believable beyond question when he related all these commandments. G’d did not want to rely only on the various miracles which Moses had performed and would still perform but He wanted the people to be eye witnesses to the source of all this legislation. The Torah added the words את משה to testify that the people had accepted the Torah, a Book which had preceded the existence of the universe, i.e. as Bereshit Rabbah 1,5 phrased it: “before any of the mountains had been born.” Both the concept of Torah and the concept of the Jewish people had preceded the creation of the universe. The words בהר סיני are a reminder of all the overpowering experiences the people had been privy to as mentioned again in Deut. 33,2 and Psalms 68,18.
 
