Sheviit, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah defines what type of produce must be found in the field such that that type of produce may continue to be stored and eaten in one’s home.

Mishnah Four 
One may eat by virtue of similar produce regarded as ownerless [still found in the fields], but not when it was stored [and declared ownerless].   
Rabbi Yose permits even when it was stored [and then declared ownerless].
One may continue to eat by virtue of the poor grains [that grow between the grass], or by virtue of the trees that yield bi-annually, but one must not eat by virtue of winter-grapes.   
Rabbi Judah permits provided they began to ripen before the summer [of the seventh year] had ended.

Explanation
Section one: This is an important clarification. All produce that grows in the field on Sheviit is considered ownerless—anyone may come and pick it. One can store that produce and eat it at home as long as ownerless produce of the same kind is found in the field. Once the ownerless produce in the field is gone, one can no longer eat it at home.
However, if someone stored that produce and then made it ownerless later so that anyone (including animals) could come and eat it, this doesn’t count as “found in the field.” This will not allow one to eat such produce at home.
Section two: Rabbi Yose allows one to continue to eat produce even if the only other type of produce of this nature that is “found in the field” is something that a person once stored and only then made ownerless so that others or animals could come and eat it.
Section three: The produce that is found in the field can be a low quality version of the same kind that is stored in one’s house. So if there are poor grains that grow among the grasses in the field, then one can continue to eat similar type of grains, but of higher quality, in one’s home. The same is true of a tree that produces two yields, one in the spring and one in the summer. If the summer yield is still in the tree then one can continue to eat that which is stored at home. However, when it comes to grapes, “winter-grapes” do not count. Grapes in Israel are harvested in the fall and once the fall-grapes are no longer on the vines, one cannot store the grapes (or their by-products) at home.
Section four: Rabbi Judah says that these winter-grapes do count if they started to ripen before summer was over. In such a case they are considered close enough to fall-grapes that one can eat other stored fall-grapes (and their by-products) when these winter-grapes are found in the field. 

