Sheviit, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One
 
Introduction
Our mishnah teaches that there are certain types of produce that grow in the field which are not subject to the laws of sheviit. There are two such categories in our mishnah. The first are wild plants that people do not cultivate and store. The assumption automatically made with regard to these plants is that they are ownerless.
The second category is plants that grow without being cultivated. If something grows on its own, it should be permitted to eat it on sheviit. However, we shall see that some rabbis were stricter on this matter.

Mishnah One
Rue, goosefoot, purslane, hill coriander, celery, and meadow-berries, are exempt from tithes.  
And they may be purchased from anyone during the sabbatical year, since such produce is not usually stored. 
Rabbi Judah says: aftergrowths of mustard are permitted, since transgressors are not suspected concerning them.  
Rabbi Shimon says: all aftergrowths are permitted, with the exception of the aftergrowths of cabbage, since such cannot be placed within the category of field-vegetables. 
But the sages say: all aftergrowths are forbidden.  

Explanation
Section one: Plants that are ownerless such as those in this section need not be tithed. Since these things grow wildly and people don’t gather them in order to store them, they are not subject to tithes.
Section two: Generally speaking it is prohibited to purchase sheviit produce from an “am haaretz” a person who is not scrupulous in observance of these laws. The reason for this prohibition is that the sanctity of the sheviit produce is transferred to the money when one uses it to buy the produce. Henceforth, that money can only be used to buy food, drink or oil for anointing. Since we can assume that the am haaretz will not observe these laws, one should not buy sheviit produce from an am haaretz. However, since these things grew on their own without being cultivated the laws of sheviit do not apply and one may buy them from anyone, even an am haaretz. 
Section three: The second half of the mishnah deals with things that grew on their own on Sheviit. The problem with such produce is that it is impossible to tell whether something grew on its own on sheviit or was planted and cultivated on sheviit. Rabbi Judah holds that mustard is permitted, because it is unlikely that someone had planted this mustard and grew it intentionally on the sabbatical year.
Section four: Rabbi Shimon is even more lenient and holds that it is permitted to purchase all vegetable aftergrowths except for cabbage which is clearly not an aftergrowth because it grows only in a garden and only if it is specifically planted. 
Section five: The other rabbis hold that it is forbidden to eat any aftergrowths because they may have come from produce planted on sheviit.
I should note that I have explained the mishnah according to Albeck. Others explain it differently.
