Sheviit, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with how long one may continue to eat certain types of produce that can either be gathered while still moist or when already dry.

Mishnah Six 
If one gathered moist herbs, he may eat them until the sweet [herbs in the field] have dried up.
And if he gathered dry [herbs], [he may eat them] until the second rainfall.   
Leaves of reeds and of leaves of the vine [may be eaten] until they fall from the stems.
But if he gathered them dry, they may be eaten until the second rainfall. 
Rabbi Akiba says: in all these cases, [they may be eaten] until the second rainfall.

Explanation
Section one: After the sweet herbs are no longer found in the field, he must remove the moist herbs that he has gathered into his house. This is Albeck’s explanation of the term “sweet”. Other commentators explain that the word “sweet” refers to the ground water which “sweetens” the herbs growing in the field. Once this water has dried up, he may no longer keep the moist herbs at home, because they can no longer be found moist in the field. 
Section two: However, if he gathered the herbs while they were dry he may keep them in his home until the second rain of the eighth year, because it is only at this late stage that the dry herbs in the field from the seventh year will no longer be fit for animal consumption. Again, as we have learned, if there is such a type of plant in the field that an animal can eat, then a person can eat it in his home.
There are three different opinions as to when the second rainfall is—the 7, the 17th or the 23rd of Heshvan, the second month of the Jewish year. 
Section three: If he is eating leaves of reeds or vines he can eat them as long as they are still found moist on the stems of the reeds or vines. If they are so dry that when one touches them they fall from the stem, then he must remove them from his house.
Section four: However, if he is eating them when they are already dry then he can continue to do so until the second rainfall of the eighth year.
Section five: Rabbi Akiva disagrees with the halakhot in sections one and three and holds that even when it comes to moist herbs or leaves, he can continue to eat them and store them until the second rainfall.

