Sheviit, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches that produce that is usually used for food cannot be used, during the sabbatical year, for medicinal purposes. This is because one is usually supposed to use sabbatical year produce for its typical purpose—if it is food it should be eaten, if it is drink it should be drunk and if it is used for dyeing it should be used in dyeing.

Mishnah One
They said an important general principle with regard to the sabbatical year: 
Anything that is usually designated as food for humans, one may not make a poultice of it for a person. And there is no need to say [that he may not make a poultice of it] for a beast. 
Anything that is not usually designated as for food for humans may be used as a poultice for a person, but not for cattle. 
And anything not usually designated either for humans or for animals, but now he thought to use it as food for either a person or an animal, we impose upon it the stringent laws applying both to people and beasts.  
If he thought to use it as wood [for a fire], behold it is treated as wood [and the laws of sheviit do not apply]; for example, savory, hyssop, or thyme.

Explanation
Section one:  The phrase “this is an important general principle” appears only three times in the entire Mishnah, and it appears twice in Sheviit. Its other appearance is in the seventh chapter of Shabbat. It seems that this whole mishnah is the “general principle” and not just section one.
Section two: Produce that is normally used as human food cannot be used as a poultice at all, neither for humans nor for an animal. 
Section three: However, if it is normally animal feed, it can be used as a poultice for humans, but not for animals. Since it is fit for animal feed it can’t be used as a poultice for them but since it is not fit for human consumption a person could use it as a poultice.
Section four: If something was not normally used for food for humans or for animals, but in a certain circumstance a person decided to use it for either purpose, it is dealt with stringently. It can’t be used for medicinal purposes for a human being, as we learned in section one. The “stringent law” which applies to beasts is explained in the Yerushalmi as being a prohibition of boiling it till it is completely soft. According to the Yerushalmi it is prohibited to boil till completely soft sabbatical produce which is normally used for animal food.
Section five: The laws of sheviit do not apply to things that are used to light a fire. So if with regard to one of these things he decided to use it to make a fire, then the laws of sabbatical year produce do not apply at all. The mishnah gives an example of some plants that are multi-purpose and therefore how they can be used will depend on what he intends to use them for. 

