Sheviit, Chapter Two, Mishnah Ten

Mishnah Ten
Gourds which he had kept [in the ground] for seed: if they had hardened before Rosh Hashanah and had become unfit for human food, they may be kept during the seventh year; otherwise, they must not be kept in the seventh year.   
Their buds are forbidden in the seventh year.   
They may irrigate the soil of a white field (a grain field), the words of Rabbi Shimon. 
But Rabbi Elazar ben Jacob prohibits. 
They may soak the rice in the sabbatical year.
Rabbi Shimon says: but they may not be trim [the rice].  

Explanation
Section one: As we shall learn later in the tractate, if produce is deemed to be “sabbatical year produce” then it must be removed when that species is no longer growing in the field. Our mishnah deals with someone who keeps gourds in the ground for them to dry up and then uses them for seed.  If they have dried and hardened before Rosh Hashanah and are no longer fit for humans to eat, then they don’t count as sabbatical year produce, but rather go according to the sixth year. Thus when he harvests them during the seventh year, he will not be obligated to remove them when there are no longer gourds still growing in the field.  However, if they have not hardened by Rosh Hashanah, then the laws of sabbatical produce do apply and he will be able to keep them only as long as gourds are growing in the field.
Section two:  Since their buds remain fit for human consumption even after the gourds themselves have hardened, they are prohibited during the seventh year, because that is when they are harvested.
Section three: Rabbi Shimon allows one to water a grain field on the sabbatical year so that grain will grow in the eighth year.  However, Rabbi Elazar ben Jacob prohibits this.
Section four:  One is allowed to intensively soak rice during the sabbatical year. According to some commentators this refers to rice that took root before Rosh Hashanah.  However, Rabbi Shimon points out that even though irrigating, which is usually prohibited during the seventh year, is permitted, trimming the plants to improve them is forbidden. Again we see that preserving the plant is permitted while doing any work to improve it is forbidden.       

