Sheviit, Chapter One, Mishnah Four
 
Introduction
The first half of this mishnah continues to deal with the same subject with which we have been dealing with since the beginning of Sheviit--when may one plow an entire field of trees and when one may plow only the individual trees?
The second half of the mishnah deals with Exodus 34:21, which states, that plowing and harvesting are forbidden on the Sabbath. The sages wondered why the verse would specify a prohibition of plowing and harvesting on the Sabbath when all work is prohibited. Hence they took the verse out of context and applied it to the Sabbatical year, instead of Shabbat (the sabbatical day).
 
Mishnah Four
If one of the trees was capable of bearing a cake of dried figs [weighing sixty manehs], and the other two unable; or, if two could do so, but one cannot, then they may plow them only for their own needs.
[This is the rule if the number of trees is] from three to nine, but if there were ten trees or more, whether they produce [the requisite amount of fruit or not] the whole bet seah may be plowed on their account.   
As it says: “In plowing and in harvesting, you shall rest” (Ex 34:21). It was unnecessary to state plowing and harvesting in the seventh year, rather [what it means is] the plowing of the year preceding which encroaches on the sabbatical year, and the harvest of the seventh year which extends into the year after. 
Rabbi Ishmael says:   just as plowing is an optional act, so harvesting [referred to in the verse] is optional, thus excluding the harvesting of the omer [which is obligatory].

Explanation
Section one:  If one or even two of the trees was large enough but the others were not, they still may only plow the individual trees and not the whole field.
Section two:  However, if there were more than ten trees, then they can plow the entire field, even if those ten trees don’t produce the requisite amount of fruit.
Section three:  This midrash is the basis of the entire first three and a half mishnayot of the tractate.  According to the rabbinic way of reading the Torah, this verse is seemingly superfluous, since we already know that one must rest on the Sabbath. Their answer is twofold. First of all, this verse applies to the sabbatical year, and not to the Shabbat. Second, it would also be unnecessary for this verse to prohibit plowing and harvesting in the sabbatical year itself because Leviticus 24:4-5 has already prohibited similar activities.  Therefore, the mishnah interprets this verse as referring to the plowing that precedes the Sabbatical year and to harvesting that occurs after the Sabbatical year. As we have learned throughout the chapter, it is forbidden to plow a field for the benefit of produce that will grow in the sabbatical year.  Here we learn that in the year following the Sabbatical year it is forbidden to harvest produce which mostly grew during the Sabbatical year, or that was illegally sown during the Sabbatical year.  
Section four: R. Yishmael gives an entirely different interpretation of the verse.  He interprets the verse to refer to the Shabbat and not to the Sabbatical year.  As to why this verse is necessary, after we have learned elsewhere that work is prohibited on Shabbat, Rabbi Ishmael explains that this verse comes to teach us that only “optional” harvesting is prohibited and not “obligatory” harvesting, the only example of which is the harvesting of the Omer on the second day of Pesah. If the second day of Pesah should fall on Shabbat, which it can according to the rabbinic calendar (but not according to the Sadducean calendar, where it always falls on Sat. night) then the harvesting of the Omer (the first barley) supersedes the Shabbat prohibition. Just as plowing is optional and therefore prohibited, so too the only type of harvesting that is prohibited is that which is optional.    
