Sheviit, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches that sabbatical year produce can only be used for its usual purpose. This seems to be a prohibition against “over-intervention” or manufacture of sabbatical year produce. While wheat can be made into bread, olives into oil and grapes into wine, a human being cannot convert these products into a material which is not what they seem, at least to us, to have been intended to become. This is because the produce that grows on its own during sheviit belongs to God, and not to us. While we may use it, we may not overly change it.

Mishnah Two
Sabbatical year produce may be used for food, drink and for anointing.   
That which is usually eaten can be used for food only; that which is usually used for anointing can be used only for anointing, and that which is usually used for drinking can be used for drink only. One may not anoint with wine and vinegar, but he may anoint with oil.   
So too with terumah and second tithe.   
Greater leniency was applied to [oil of] the seventh year, since it can be used for lamp-kindling. 

Explanation
Section one: Although Leviticus 25:6 states, “But you may eat whatever the land during its sabbath will produce” the rabbis do not take this to mean that you can only eat sabbatical produce. It can also be used as drink or as an ointment.
Section two: However, one cannot change something normally used for food and use it for something else, and the same with regard to drinking and anointing.  The example is wine and vinegar which cannot be used for anointing, because they are not normally used for such a purpose. Note that even though oil is also used for cooking and eating, since anointing is also a normal usage, it can also be used as such.
Section three:  Terumah and second tithe are called “kadosh (holy)” by the Torah, and they too can therefore only be used for eating, drinking and anointing.
Section four: While terumah and second tithe cannot be used for lighting a lamp, sheviit oil can. Perhaps this section signifies that there is a difference between sheviit on the one hand and terumah and second tithe. Sheviit’s laws are governed by the principle that one should not overly intervene in their processing. Therefore, if oil is normally used for lighting, sheviit oil can also be used for lighting. Terumah and second tithe are “holy” and therefore they cannot be used for lighting, because that is not considered a “holy” purpose. 
 


