Sheviit, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Six

Introduction
One is not allowed to process sheviit produce in the normal way that it is processed. This is derived midrashically from Leviticus 25:5 which states, “The grapes of your vine you shall not harvest.” The rabbis remark that he may not harvest them in the normal way, but he may harvest them in an unusual manner. Our mishnah extends this prohibition (and permission) beyond the time of harvesting, to the time of processing and preserving that which has been harvested.  We should note by now that this type of thought is common in rabbinic literature—things done in a different manner are not prohibited, or sometimes not as prohibited, as they would be if they were done in the normal fashion.

Mishnah Six
Sabbatical figs may not be cut in the muktzeh, but he may cut them in an open place.   
Grapes may not be trodden in the wine-press, but they may be trodden in a kneading-trough.   
Olives may not be prepared in an olive-press or in a small olive-press, but he may crush them and bring them into a small olive-press in the field. 
Rabbi Shimon says: they may even be crushed in the [larger] olive-press, and then he brings them into the smaller press.

Explanation
Section one: The muktzeh was, according to Albeck, the place where they would normally cut figs. They would make cuts in the figs and then either fold them up in order to dry them out or make fig cakes out of them. In either case this was prohibited because this was the normal way of processing figs. However, one could cut them up in an “open place (hurvah)” which also might be translated as “a desolate place.” This is permitted since it would have been unusual to cut up figs there.
Section two: The mishnah continues to state similar laws with regards to grapes and olives. Grapes cannot be trodden in a regular wine-press, but if one puts them in a kneading-trough, it is permitted.
Section three: Olives cannot be prepared in the regular, large olive press and not even in a smaller version of this olive press. However, one may crush the grapes and then put them into a smaller olive press (called a “bodedah”) which is carved out of stones and can be found in the fields.
Section four: Rabbi Shimon is slightly more lenient. He can begin the process of crushing the grapes in the larger olive press (the “bet habad”) and then complete the process in the bodedah. 

