Sheviit, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Sheviit produce may be stored in one’s house as long as that same type of produce can be found in the field. The question is—where must this produce be found in the field? Anywhere in the world? In the same town? Same country? Our mishnah divides the land of Israel into three territories and then three sub-territories such that if a certain produce can be found in the field in that territory it may be stored in one’s house in that territory.

Mishnah Two
There are three territories in respect to the law of removal [of sheviit produce]:   [these are]: Judea, Transjordan, and Galilee, and there are three territories in each one.   
Upper Galilee, lower Galilee, and the valley.
From Kefar Hananiah upwards, the region where sycamores do not grow, is Upper Galilee. 
From Kefar Hananiah downwards, where the sycamores do grow, is Lower Galilee.
The borders of Tiberias are the valley. 
Those of Judea are: the mountain region, the plains [of the south], and the valley.   
The plains of Lod are like the plains of the south, and its mountain region is like the king's hill-country.   
From Bet Horon to the sea is considered as one land.  

Explanation
Section one:  If a certain type of produce can be found in the field in Judea, then that produce can be stored in one’s home in Judea, but not in the Galilee or Transjordan, if that produce is no longer found in the field there. Once that type of produce is no longer in a certain region, everyone from that region must remove that produce from their homes.
Section two: Each land is subdivided into three other lands, which the Mishnah now proceeds to list.  This section divides the Galilee into three sections, which by the way are still used as reference points to this day. 
Section three: This section divides the region of Judea into three. The mountain region is also called, “The King’s Mountain.” The valley goes from Ein Gedi in the south to Jericho in the north.
Section four: The plains of Lod are considered to be part of the plains of the south, even though they are geographically somewhat separate.
Section five: From Bet Horon, which is in the northwestern side of Judea (near Modiin where I live) to the sea is one region for matters of sheviit. It is considered part of Judea.
The mishnah does not explain how the Transjordan is divided, although this is explained elsewhere.  

