Introduction, Chapter Three, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with building steps leading down into a ravine.  According to Albeck this mishnah refers to terrace farming. The steps are the terraces that are built into the sides of the mountain in order to better utilize this land for farming. 

Mishnah Eight 
They may not build steps leading to ravines in the sixth year after the rains have stopped, for this would be improving the fields for the seventh year. 
But he may build in the seventh year itself, after the rains have stopped, for this would be a improving the fields for the eighth year. 
He may not block them [the steps] with earth, but he may make an embankment.   
Any stone which he can stick out his hand and pick up, may be removed.

Explanation
Section one: Normally speaking, they would build the steps/terraces into the ravine after the rains had stopped (around Pesah time). The rains would have damaged the terraces and hence after the rains stopped it would be time to repair the terraces. 
If he builds such terraces in the sixth year for the seventh year then it looks like he is improving the field in order to plant it in the seventh year. However, he can build terraces in the seventh year after the rains have stopped because everyone will see that this is preparing the field for the eighth year, which is permitted.
Section two: When rebuilding the terraces during the seventh year he may not block them with earth because then it looks like he is preparing the earth to plant for the seventh year.  But he may make an embankment, which Albeck interprets as a stone wall that does not have any earth on top of the stones.  When he rebuilds the terrace in such a way it will be clear that he is not planning on sewing for the seventh year.
Section three:  While building the embankment or the terrace he can’t just pick up any stone he wishes because that looks like he is clearing his field in order to prepare it for sewing. He can only pick up a stone that is close enough to him that he can just stick out his hand and pick it up.
  


