Sheviit, Chapter Five, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with selling things to a person who is suspected of not observing the laws of sheviit, for fear that he may use them inappropriately on sheviit.

Mishnah Eight
Bet Shammai says: one must not sell him a plowing cow in the seventh year. 
But Bet Hillel permits, since he may slaughter it.   
One may sell him produce even at sowing time.
And one may lend him a seah measure, even though he knows that he has a threshing-floor.   
One may exchange coins for him, even though he knows that he has workers. 
But all these things, if he expresses [that they will be used for unlawful purposes], then they are forbidden.  

Explanation
Section one: Bet Shammai seems to disagree with the rule that we learned in mishnah six above, that if something can be used for both a prohibited and a permitted purpose, one can sell that thing to a person suspected of transgressing the laws of sheviit. A cow that is generally used for plowing is the example that the Mishnah uses. According to Bet Shammai, one cannot sell such a cow to a person suspected of transgressing sheviit. Bet Hillel, on the other hand, holds that this is permitted because it is possible that the person bought the cow in order to slaughter it. Bet Hillel gives the person the benefit of the doubt, whereas Bet Shammai does not.
Section two:  One may sell produce to a person suspected of transgressing sheviit even at the season when a person sows seed. We do not suspect that he is buying the produce in order to use its seed—rather we assume that he is buying it in order to eat it.
Section three: It is permitted to lend this person a utensil which measures a seah and we don’t suspect that he will use it to measure wheat in order to sell it. Rather we assume that he might need to measure it in order to know how much he needs to grind. 
Section four: If this person asks to make change, one may exchange coins with him even if he suspects that the person may use the coins to pay workers to do work prohibited on the sabbatical year. Again, we give the person the benefit of the doubt and assume that he may need the coins for some permitted purpose.
Section five: If the person borrowing or buying these things expresses that he is intending to use them for a prohibited purpose, then it is clear that one may not sell or loan to him, or do any of the activities mentioned in the above mishnayot.  We obviously cannot give him the benefit of the doubt if he says that he is going to use them for a prohibited activity.
