EZRA 

 

NOW IN the first year of Cyrus 
king of Persia, that the word of 
the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah 
might be accomplished, the LORD 
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of 
Persia, that he made a proclamation 
throughout all his kingdom, and put it 
also in writing, saying: 2’Thus saith 
Cyrus king of Persia: All the kingdoms 
of the earth hath the LORD, the God of 
heaven, given me; and He hath 
charged me to build Him a house in 
Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 
3Whosoever there is among you of all 
His people—his God be with him—let 
him go up to Jerusalem, which is in 
Judah, and build the house of the 
LORD, the God of Israel, He is the God 
who is in Jerusalem. 4And whosoever 
is left, in any place where he 
sojourneth, let the men of his place 
help him with silver, and with gold, 
and with goods, and with beasts, 
beside the freewill-offering for the 
house of God which is in Jerusalem.’ 

5Then rose up the heads of 
fathers’houses of Judah and Benjamin, 
and the priests, and the Levites, even 
all whose spirit God had stirred to go 
up to build the house of the LORD 
which is in Jerusalem. 6And all they 
that were round about them 
strengthened their hands with vessels 
of silver, with gold, with goods, and 
with beasts, and with precious things, 
beside all that was willingly offered. 
7Also Cyrus the king brought forth the 
vessels of the house of the LORD, 
which Nebuchadnezzar had brought 
forth out of Jerusalem, and had put 
them in the house of his gods; 8even 
those did Cyrus king of Persia bring 
forth by the hand of Mithredath the 
treasurer, and numbered them unto 
Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah. 9And 
this is the number of them: thirty 
basins of gold, a thousand basins of 
silver, nine and twenty knives; 10thirty 
bowls of gold, silver bowls of a second 
sort four hundred and ten, and other 
vessels a thousand. 11All the vessels of 
gold and of silver were five thousand 
and four hundred. All these did 
Sheshbazzar bring up, when they of 
the captivity were brought up from 
Babylon unto Jerusalem. 

Now these are the children of the 
province, that went up out of the 
captivity of those that had been carried 
away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king 
of Babylon had carried away unto 
Babylon, and that returned unto 
Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto 
his city; 2who came with Zerubbabel, 
Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, 
Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, 
Rehum, Baanah. 

The number of the men of the 
people of Israel: 
1 

2 




3The children of Parosh, two 
thousand a hundred seventy and two. 

4The children of Shephatiah, three 
hundred seventy and two. 

5The children of Arah, seven 
hundred seventy and five. 

6The children of Pahath-moab, of 
the children of Jeshua and Joab, two 
thousand eight hundred and twelve. 

7The children of Elam, a thousand 
two hundred fifty and four. 

8The children of Zattu, nine hundred 
forty and five. 

9The children of Zaccai, seven 
hundred and threescore. 

10The children of Bani, six hundred 
forty and two. 

11The children of Bebai, six hundred 
twenty and three. 

12The children of Azgad, a thousand 
two hundred twenty and two. 

13The children of Adonikam, six 
hundred sixty and six. 

14The children of Bigvai, two 
thousand fifty and six. 

15The children of Adin, four 
hundred fifty and four. 

16The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, 
ninety and eight. 

17The children of Bezai, three 
hundred twenty and three. 

18The children of Jorah, a hundred 
and twelve. 

19The children of Hashum, two 
hundred twenty and three. 

20The children of Gibbar, ninety and 
five. 

21The children of Beth-lehem, a 
hundred twenty and three. 

22The men of Netophah, fifty and 
six. 

23The men of Anathoth, a hundred 
twenty and eight. 

24The children of Azmaveth, forty 
and two. 

25The children of Kiriath-arim, 
Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven 
hundred and forty and three. 

26The children of Ramah and Geba, 
six hundred twenty and one. 

27The men of Michmas, a hundred 
twenty and two. 

28The men of Beth-el and Ai, two 
hundred twenty and three. 

29The children of Nebo, fifty and 
two. 

30The children of Magbish, a 
hundred fifty and six. 

31The children of the other Elam, a 
thousand two hundred fifty and four. 

32The children of Harim, three 
hundred and twenty. 

33The children of Lod, Hadid, and 
Ono, seven hundred twenty and five. 

34The children of Jericho, three 
hundred forty and five. 

35The children of Senaah, three 
thousand and six hundred and thirty. 

 

36The priests: 

The children of Jedaiah, of the 
house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy 
and three. 

37The children of Immer, a thousand 
fifty and two. 

38The children of Pashhur, a 
thousand two hundred forty and seven. 


39The children of Harim, a thousand 
and seventeen. 

40The Levites: the children of Jeshua 
and Kadmiel, of the children of 
Hodaviah, seventy and four. 

 

41The singers: the children of Asaph, 
a hundred twenty and eight. 

 

42The children of the porters: the 
children of Shallum, the children of 
Ater, the children of Talmon, the 
children of Akkub, the children of 
Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all a 
hundred thirty and nine. 

 

43The Nethinim: the children of 
Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the 
children of Tabbaoth; 44the children of 
Keros, the children of Siaha, the 
children of Padon; 45the children of 
Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the 
children of Akkub; 46the children of 
Hagab, the children of Salmai, the 
children of Hanan; 47the children of 
Giddel, the children of Gahar, the 
children of Reaiah; 48the children of 
Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the 
children of Gazzam; 49the children of 
Uzza, the children of Paseah, the 
children of Besai; 50the children of 
Asnah, the children of Meunim, the 
children of Nephusim; 51the children 
of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, 
the children of Harhur; 52the children 
of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the 
children of Harsha; 53the children of 
Barkos, the children of Sisera, the 
children of Temah; 54the children of 
Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 

55The children of Solomon’s 
servants: the children of Sotai, the 
children of Hassophereth, the children 
of Peruda; 56the children of Jaalah, the 
children of Darkon, the children of 
Giddel; 57the children of Shephatiah, 
the children of Hattil, the children of 
Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of 
Ami. 

58All the Nethinim, and the children 
of Solomon’s servants, were three 
hundred ninety and two. 

 

59And these were they that went up 
from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub, 
Addan, and Immer; but they could not 
tell their fathers’houses, and their seed, 
whether they were of Israel: 60the 
children of Delaiah, the children of 
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six 
hundred fifty and two. 61And of the 
children of the priests: the children of 
Habaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the 
children of Barzillai, who took a wife 
of the daughters of Barzillai the 
Gileadite, and was called after their 
name. 62These sought their register, 
that is, the genealogy, but it was not 
found; therefore were they deemed 
polluted and put from the priesthood. 
63And the aTirshatha said unto them, 
that they should not eat of the most 
holy things, till there stood up a priest 
with Urim and with Thummim. 

a That is, governor. 

 


64The whole congregation together 
was forty and two thousand three 
hundred and threescore, 65beside their 
men-servants and their maid-servants, 
of whom there were seven thousand 
three hundred thirty and seven; and 
they had two hundred singing men and 
singing women. 66Their horses were 
seven hundred thirty and six; their 
mules, two hundred forty and five; 
67their camels, four hundred thirty and 
five; their asses, six thousand seven 
hundred and twenty. 

68And some of the heads of 
fathers’houses, when they came to the 
house of the LORD which is in 
Jerusalem, offered willingly for the 
house of God to set it up in its place; 
69they gave after their ability into the 
treasury of the work threescore and 
one thousand darics of gold, and five 
thousand pounds of silver, and one 
hundred priests’tunics. 

70So the priests, and the Levites, and 
some of the people, and the singers, 
and the porters, and the Nethinim, 
dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in 
their cities. 

And when the seventh month was 
come, and the children of Israel 
were in the cities, the people gathered 
themselves together as one man to 
Jerusalem. 2Then stood up Jeshua the 
son of Jozadak, and his brethren the 
priests, and Zerubbabel the son of 
Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded 
the altar of the God of Israel, to offer 
burnt-offerings thereon, as it is written 
in the Law of Moses the man of God. 
3And they set the altar upon its bases; 
for fear was upon them because of the 
people of the countries, and they 
offered burnt-offerings thereon unto 
the LORD, even burnt-offerings 
morning and evening. 4And they kept 
the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, 
and offered the daily burnt-offerings 
by number, according to the ordinance, 
as the duty of every day required; 5and 
afterward the continual burnt-offering, 
and the offerings of the new moons, 
and of all the appointed seasons of the 
LORD that were hallowed, and of every 
one that willingly offered a freewill-
offering unto the LORD. 6From the first 
day of the seventh month began they 
to offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD; 
but the foundation of the temple of the 
LORD was not yet laid. 7They gave 
money also unto the hewers, and to the 
carpenters; and food, and drink, and 
oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of 
Tyre, to bring cedar-trees from 
Lebanon to the sea, unto Joppa, 
according to the grant that they had of 
Cyrus king of Persia. 

8Now in the second year of their 
coming unto the house of God at 
Jerusalem, in the second month, began 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and 
Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the rest 
of their brethren the priests and the 
Levites, and all they that were come 
out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; 
and appointed the Levites, from 
twenty years old and upward, to have 
the oversight of the work of the house 
of the LORD. 9Then stood Jeshua with 
3 




his sons and his brethren, and Kadmiel 
and his sons, the sons of Judah, 
together, to have the oversight of the 
workmen in the house of God; the sons 
of Henadad also, with their sons and 
their brethren the Levites. 10And when 
the builders laid the foundation of the 
temple of the LORD, they set the priests 
in their apparel with trumpets, and the 
Levites the sons of Asaph with 
cymbals, to praise the LORD, according 
to the direction of David king of Israel. 
11And they sang one to another in 
praising and giving thanks unto the 
LORD: ‘for He is good, for His mercy 
endureth for ever toward Israel.’ And 
all the people shouted with a great 
shout, when they praised the LORD, 
because the foundation of the house of 
the LORD was laid. 12But many of the 
priests and Levites and heads of 
fathers’houses, the old men that had 
seen the first house standing on its 
foundation, wept with a loud voice, 
when this house was before their eyes; 
and many shouted aloud for joy; 13so 
that the people could not discern the 
noise of the shout of joy from the 
noise of the weeping of the people; for 
the people shouted with a loud shout, 
and the noise was heard afar off. 

Now when the adversaries of 
Judah and Benjamin heard that 
the children of the captivity were 
building a temple unto the LORD, the 
God of Israel; 2then they drew near to 
Zerubbabel, and to the heads of 
fathers’houses, and said unto them: 
‘Let us build with you; for we seek 
your God, as ye do; and we do 
sacrifice unto Him since the days of 
Esarhaddon king of Assyria, who 
brought us up hither.’ 3But 
Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of 
the heads of fathers’houses of Israel, 
said unto them: ‘Ye have nothing to do 
with us to build a house unto our God; 
but we ourselves together will build 
unto the LORD, the God of Israel, as 
king Cyrus the king of Persia hath 
commanded us.’ 4Then the people of 
the land weakened the hands of the 
people of Judah, and harried them 
while they were building, 5and hired 
counsellors against them, to frustrate 
their purpose, all the days of Cyrus 
king of Persia, even until the reign of 
Darius king of Persia. 6And in the 
reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of 
his reign, wrote they an accusation 
against the inhabitants of Judah and 
Jerusalem. 

7And in the days of Artaxerxes 
wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, 
and the rest of his companions, unto 
Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the 
writing of the letter was written in the 
Aramaic character, and set forth in the 
Aramaic tongue. 8Rehum the 
commander and Shimshai the scribe 
wrote a letter against Jerusalem to 
Artaxerxes the king in this sort— 9then 
wrote Rehum the commander, and 
Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of 
their companions; the Dinites, and the 
Apharesattechites, the Tarpelites, the 
Apharesites, the Archevites, the 
Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the 
4 




Dehites, the Elamites, 10and the rest of 
the nations whom the great and noble 
Asenappar brought over, and set in the 
city of Samaria, and the rest that are in 
the country beyond the River:— ‘And 
now—11this is the copy of the letter 
that they sent unto him, even unto 
Artaxerxes the king—thy servants the 
men beyond the River—and now12be it 
known unto the king, that the Jews that 
came up from thee are come to us unto 
Jerusalem; they are building the 
rebellious and the bad city, and have 
finished the walls, and are digging out 
the foundations. 13Be it known now 
unto the king, that, if this city be 
builded, and the walls finished, they 
will not pay tribute, impost, or toll, 
and so thou wilt endamage the revenue 
of the kings. 14Now because we eat the 
salt of the palace, and it is not meet for 
us to see the king’s dishonour, 
therefore have we sent and announced 
to the king, 15that search may be made 
in the book of the records of thy 
fathers; so shalt thou find in the book 
of the records, and know that this city 
is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto 
kings and provinces, and that they 
have moved sedition within the same 
of old time; for which cause was this 
city laid waste. 16We announce to the 
king that, if this city be builded, and 
the walls finished, by this means thou 
shalt have no portion beyond the 
River.’ 

17Then sent the king an answer unto 
Rehum the commander, and to 
Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of 
their companions that dwell in 
Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the 
River: ‘Peace, and now18the letter 
which ye sent unto us hath been 
plainly read before me. 19And I 
decreed, and search hath been made, 
and it is found that this city of old time 
hath made insurrection against kings, 
and that rebellion and sedition have 
been made therein. 20There have been 
mighty kings also over Jerusalem, who 
have ruled over all the country beyond 
the River; and tribute, impost, and toll, 
was paid unto them. 21Make ye now a 
decree to cause these men to cease, 
and that this city be not builded, until a 
decree shall be made by me. 22And 
take heed that ye be not slack herein; 
why should damage grow to the hurt 
of the kings?’ 

23Then when the copy of king 
Artaxerxes’letter was read before 
Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and 
their companions, they went in haste to 
Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made 
them to cease by force and power. 
24Then ceased the work of the house of 
God which is at Jerusalem; and it 
ceased unto the second year of the 
reign of Darius king of Persia. 

Now the prophets, Haggai the 
prophet, and Zechariah the son of 
Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews that 
were in Judah and Jerusalem; in the 
name of the God of Israel prophesied 
they unto them. 2Then rose up 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and 
Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began 
to build the house of God which is at 
5 




Jerusalem; and with them were the 
prophets of God, helping them. 3At the 
same time came to them Tattenai, the 
governor beyond the River, and 
Shethar-bozenai, and their 
companions, and said thus unto them: 
‘Who gave you a decree to build this 
house, and to finish this structure?’ 
4’Then spoke we unto them after this 
manner [, wrote they]: What are the 
names of the men that build this 
building?’ 5But the eye of their God 
was upon the elders of the Jews, and 
they did not make them cease, till the 
matter should come to Darius, and 
then answer should be returned by 
letter concerning it. 

6The copy of the letter that 
Tattenai, the governor beyond the 
River, and Shethar-bozenai, and his 
companions the Apharesachites, who 
were beyond the River, sent unto 
Darius the king; 7they sent a letter unto 
him, wherein was written thus: ‘Unto 
Darius the king, all peace. 8Be it 
known unto the king, that we went into 
the province of Judah, to the house of 
the great God, which is builded with 
great stones, and timber is laid in the 
walls, and this work goeth on with 
diligence and prospereth in their 
hands. 9Then asked we those elders, 
and said unto them thus: Who gave 
you a decree to build this house, and to 
finish this wall? 10We asked them their 
names also, to announce to thee, that 
we might write the names of the men 
that were at the head of them. 11And 
thus they returned us answer, saying: 
We are the servants of the God of 
heaven and earth, and build the house 
that was builded these many years ago, 
which a great king of Israel builded 
and finished. 12But because that our 
fathers had provoked the God of 
heaven, He gave them into the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the 
Chaldean, who destroyed this house, 
and carried the people away into 
Babylon. 13But in the first year of 
Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king 
made a decree to build this house of 
God. 14And the gold and silver vessels 
also of the house of God, which 
Nebuchadnezzar took out of the 
temple that was in Jerusalem, and 
brought them into the temple of 
Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take 
out of the temple of Babylon, and they 
were delivered unto one whose name 
was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made 
governor; 15and he said unto him: Take 
these vessels, go, put them in the 
temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the 
house of God be builded in its place. 
16Then came the same Sheshbazzar, 
and laid the foundations of the house 
of God which is in Jerusalem; and 
since that time even until now hath it 
been in building, and yet it is not 
completed. 17Now therefore, if it seem 
good to the king, let search be made in 
the king’s treasure-house there, which 
is at Babylon, whether it be so, that a 
decree was made of Cyrus the king to 
build this house of God at Jerusalem, 
and let the king send his pleasure to us 
concerning this matter.’ 




Then Darius the king made a 
decree, and search was made in 
the house of the archives, where the 
treasures were laid up, in Babylon. 
2And there was found at Ahmetha, in 
the palace that is in the province of 
Media, a roll, and therein was thus 
written: ‘A record. 3In the first year of 
Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made a 
decree: Concerning the house of God 
at Jerusalem, let the house be builded, 
the place where they offer sacrifices, 
and let the foundations thereof be 
strongly laid; the height thereof 
threescore cubits, and the breadth 
thereof threescore cubits; 4with three 
rows of great stones, and a row of new 
timber, and let the expenses be given 
out of the king’s house; 5and also let 
the gold and silver vessels of the house 
of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took 
forth out of the temple which is at 
Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, 
be restored, and brought back unto the 
temple which is at Jerusalem, every 
one to its place, and thou shalt put 
them in the house of God.’ 

6’Now therefore, Tattenai, governor 
beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, 
and your companions the 
Apharesachites, who are beyond the 
River, be ye far from thence; 7let the 
work of this house of God alone; let 
the governor of the Jews and the elders 
of the Jews build this house of God in 
its place. 8Moreover I make a decree 
concerning what ye shall do to these 
elders of the Jews for the building of 
this house of God; that of the king’s 
goods, even of the tribute beyond the 
River, expenses be given with all 
diligence unto these men, that they be 
not hindered. 9And that which they 
have need of, both young bullocks, 
and rams, and lambs, for burnt-
offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, 
salt, wine, and oil, according to the 
word of the priests that are at 
Jerusalem, let it be given them day by 
day without fail; 10that they may offer 
sacrifices of sweet savour unto the 
God of heaven, and pray for the life of 
the king, and of his sons. 11Also I have 
made a decree, that whosoever shall 
alter this word, let a beam be pulled 
out from his house, and let him be 
lifted up and fastened thereon; and let 
his house be made a dunghill for this; 
12and may the God that hath caused 
His name to dwell there overthrow all 
kings and peoples, that shall put forth 
their hand to alter the same, to destroy 
this house of God which is at 
Jerusalem. I Darius have made a 
decree; let it be done with all 
diligence.’ 

13Then Tattenai, the governor 
beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, 
and their companions, because that 
Darius the king had thus sent, acted 
with all diligence. 14And the elders of 
the Jews builded and prospered, 
through the prophesying of Haggai the 
prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. 
And they builded and finished it, 
according to the commandment of the 
God of Israel, and according to the 
decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and 
6 




Artaxerxes king of Persia. 15And this 
house was finished on the third day of 
the month Adar, which was in the 
sixth year of the reign of Darius the 
king. 

16And the children of Israel, the 
priests and the Levites, and the rest of 
the children of the captivity, kept the 
dedication of this house of God with 
joy. 17And they offered at the 
dedication of this house of God a 
hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, 
four hundred lambs; and for a sin-
offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, 
according to the number of the tribes 
of Israel. 18And they set the priests in 
their divisions, and the Levites in their 
courses, for the service of God, which 
is at Jerusalem; as it is written in the 
book of Moses. 

19And the children of the captivity 
kept the passover upon the fourteenth 
day of the first month. 20For the priests 
and the Levites had purified 
themselves together; all of them were 
pure; and they killed the passover 
lamb for all the children of the 
captivity, and for their brethren the 
priests, and for themselves. 21And the 
children of Israel, that were come back 
out of the captivity, and all such as had 
separated themselves unto them from 
the filthiness of the nations of the land, 
to seek the LORD, the God of Israel, did 
eat, 22and kept the feast of unleavened 
bread seven days with joy; for the 
LORD had made them joyful, and had 
turned the heart of the king of Assyria 
unto them, to strengthen their hands in 
the work of the house of God, the God 
of Israel. 

 

Now after these things, in the 
reign of Artaxerxes king of 
Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son 
of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, 2the son 
of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son 
of Ahitub, 3the son of Amariah, the 
son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 
4the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, 
the son of Bukki, 5the son of Abishua, 
the son of Phinehas, the son of 
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief 
priest— 6this Ezra went up from 
Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in 
the Law of Moses, which the LORD, the 
God of Israel, had given; and the king 
granted him all his request, according 
to the hand of the LORD his God upon 
him. 7And there went up some of the 
children of Israel, and of the priests, 
and the Levites, and the singers, and 
the porters, and the Nethinim, unto 
Jerusalem, in the seventh year of 
Artaxerxes the king. 8And he came to 
Jerusalem in the fifth month, which 
was in the seventh year of the king. 
9For upon the first day of the first 
month began he to go up from 
Babylon, and on the first day of the 
fifth month came he to Jerusalem, 
according to the good hand of his God 
upon him. 10For Ezra had set his heart 
to seek the law of the LORD, and to do 
it, and to teach in Israel statutes and 
ordinances. 

11Now this is the copy of the letter 
that the king Artaxerxes gave unto 
7 




Ezra the priest, the scribe, even the 
scribe of the words of the 
commandments of the LORD, and of 
His statutes to Israel: 12’Artaxerxes, 
king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, the 
scribe of the Law of the God of 
heaven, and so forth. And now13I make 
a decree, that all they of the people of 
Israel, and their priests and the 
Levites, in my realm, that are minded 
of their own free will to go with thee 
to Jerusalem, go. 14Forasmuch as thou 
art sent of the king and his seven 
counsellors, to inquire concerning 
Judah and Jerusalem, according to the 
law of thy God which is in thy hand; 
15and to carry the silver and gold, 
which the king and his counsellors 
have freely offered unto the God of 
Israel, whose habitation is in 
Jerusalem, 16and all the silver and gold 
that thou shalt find in all the province 
of Babylon, with the freewill-offering 
of the people, and of the priests, 
offering willingly for the house of 
their God which is in Jerusalem; 
17therefore thou shalt with all diligence 
buy with this money bullocks, rams, 
lambs, with their meal-offerings and 
their drink-offerings, and shalt offer 
them upon the altar of the house of 
your God which is in Jerusalem. 18And 
whatsoever shall seem good to thee 
and to thy brethren to do with the rest 
of the silver and the gold, that do ye 
after the will of your God. 19And the 
vessels that are given thee for the 
service of the house of thy God, 
deliver thou before the God of 
Jerusalem. 20And whatsoever more 
shall be needful for the house of thy 
God, which thou shalt have occasion 
to bestow, bestow it out of the king’s 
treasure-house. 21And I, even I 
Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree 
to all the treasurers that are beyond the 
River, that whatsoever Ezra the priest, 
the scribe of the Law of the God of 
heaven, shall require of you, it be done 
with all diligence, 22unto a hundred 
talents of silver, and to a hundred 
measures of wheat, and to a hundred 
baths of wine, and to a hundred baths 
of oil, and salt without prescribing 
how much. 23Whatsoever is 
commanded by the God of heaven, let 
it be done exactly for the house of the 
God of heaven; for why should there 
be wrath against the realm of the king 
and his sons? 24Also we announce to 
you, that touching any of the priests 
and Levites, the singers, porters, 
Nethinim, or servants of this house of 
God, it shall not be lawful to impose 
tribute, impost, or toll, upon them. 
25And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of 
thy God that is in thy hand, appoint 
magistrates and judges, who may 
judge all the people that are beyond 
the River, all such as know the laws of 
thy God; and teach ye him that 
knoweth them not. 26And whosoever 
will not do the law of thy God, and the 
law of the king, let judgment be 
executed upon him with all diligence, 
whether it be unto death, or to 
banishment, or to confiscation of 
goods, or to imprisonment.’ 


27Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
our fathers, who hath put such a thing 
as this in the king’s heart, to beautify 
the house of the LORD which is in 
Jerusalem; 28and hath extended mercy 
unto me before the king, and his 
counsellors, and before all the king’s 
mighty princes. And I was 
strengthened according to the hand of 
the LORD my God upon me, and I 
gathered together out of Israel chief 
men to go up with me. 

Now these are the heads of their 
fathers’houses, and this is the 
genealogy of them that went up with 
me from Babylon, in the reign of 
Artaxerxes the king. 2Of the sons of 
Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of 
Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, 
Hattush. 3Of the sons of Shecaniah: of 
the sons of Parosh, Zechariah; and 
with him were reckoned by genealogy 
of the males a hundred and fifty. 4Of 
the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai 
the son of Zerahiah; and with him two 
hundred males. 5Of the sons of 
Shechaniah, the son of Jahaziel; and 
with him three hundred males. 6And of 
the sons of Adin, Ebed the son of 
Jonathan; and with him fifty males. 
7And of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the 
son of Athaliah; and with him seventy 
males. 8And of the sons of Shephatiah, 
Zebadiah the son of Michael; and with 
him fourscore males. 9Of the sons of 
Joab, Obadiah the son of Jehiel; and 
with him two hundred and eighteen 
males. 10And of the sons of Shelomith, 
the son of Josiphiah; and with him a 
hundred and threescore males. 11And 
of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah the son 
of Bebai; and with him twenty and 
eight males. 12And of the sons of 
Azgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan; 
and with him a hundred and ten males. 
13And of the sons of Adonikam, that 
were the last; and these are their 
names, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah; 
and with them threescore males. 14And 
of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and 
Zaccur; and with him seventy males. 

15And I gathered them together to 
the river that runneth to Ahava; and 
there we encamped three days; and I 
viewed the people, and the priests, and 
found there none of the sons of Levi. 
16Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for 
Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for 
Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for 
Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for 
Meshullam, chief men; also for 
Joiarib, and for Elnathan, teachers. 
17And I gave them commandment unto 
Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia; 
and I told them what they should say 
unto Iddo [and] his brother, who were 
set over the place Casiphia, that they 
should bring unto us ministers for the 
house of our God. 18And according to 
the good hand of our God upon us they 
brought us a man of discretion, of the 
sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son 
of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons 
and his brethren, eighteen; 19and 
Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of 
the sons of Merari, his brethren and 
their sons, twenty; 20and of the 
Nethinim, whom David and the 
8 




princes had given for the service of the 
Levites, two hundred and twenty 
Nethinim; all of them were mentioned 
by name. 

21Then I proclaimed a fast there, at 
the river Ahava, that we might humble 
ourselves before our God, to seek of 
Him a straight way, for us, and for our 
little ones, and for all our substance. 
22For I was ashamed to ask of the king 
a band of soldiers and horsemen to 
help us against the enemy in the way; 
because we had spoken unto the king, 
saying: ‘The hand of our God is upon 
all them that seek Him, for good; but 
His power and His wrath is against all 
them that forsake Him.’ 23So we fasted 
and besought our God for this; and He 
was entreated of us. 24Then I separated 
twelve of the chiefs of the priests, 
besides Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten 
of their brethren with them, 25and 
weighed unto them the silver, and the 
gold, and the vessels, even the offering 
for the house of our God, which the 
king, and his counsellors, and his 
princes, and all Israel there present, 
had offered; 26I even weighed into 
their hand six hundred and fifty talents 
of silver, and silver vessels a hundred 
talents; of gold a hundred talents; 27and 
twenty bowels of gold, of a thousand 
darics; and two vessels of fine bright 
brass, precious as gold. 28And I said 
unto them: ‘Ye are holy unto the LORD, 
and the vessels are holy; and the silver 
and the gold are a freewill-offering 
unto the LORD, the God of your fathers. 
29Watch ye, and keep them, until ye 
weigh them before the chiefs of the 
priests and the Levites, and the princes 
of the fathers’houses of Israel, at 
Jerusalem, in the chambers of the 
house of the LORD.’ 30So the priests 
and the Levites received the weight of 
the silver and the gold, and the vessels, 
to bring them to Jerusalem unto the 
house of our God. 

31Then we departed from the river 
of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first 
month, to go unto Jerusalem; and the 
hand of our God was upon us, and He 
delivered us from the hand of the 
enemy and lier-in-wait by the way. 
32And we came to Jerusalem, and 
abode there three days. 33And on the 
fourth day was the silver and the gold 
and the vessels weighed in the house 
of our God into the hand of Meremoth 
the son of Uriah the priest; and with 
him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; 
and with them was Jozabad the son of 
Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui, 
the Levites; 34the whole by number 
and by weight; and all the weight was 
written at that time. 

35The children of the captivity, that 
were come out of exile, offered burnt-
offerings unto the God of Israel, 
twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety 
and six rams, seventy and seven 
lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin-
offering; all this was a burnt-offering 
unto the LORD. 36And they delivered 
the king’s commissions unto the king’s 
satraps, and to the governors beyond 
the River; and they furthered the 
people and the house of God. 


Now when these things were 
done, the princes drew near unto 
me, saying: ‘The people of Israel, and 
the priests and the Levites, have not 
separated themselves from the peoples 
of the lands, doing according to their 
abominations, even of the Canaanites, 
the Hittites, the Perizzites, the 
Jebusites, the Ammonites, the 
Moabites, the Egyptians, and the 
Amorites. 2For they have taken of their 
daughters for themselves and for their 
sons; so that the holy seed have 
mingled themselves with the peoples 
of the lands; yea, the hand of the 
princes and rulers hath been first in 
this faithlessness.’ 3And when I heard 
this thing, I rent my garment and my 
mantle, and plucked off the hair of my 
head and of my beard, and sat down 
appalled. 4Then were assembled unto 
me every one that trembled at the 
words of the God of Israel, because of 
the faithlessness of them of the 
captivity; and I sat appalled until the 
evening offering. 

5And at the evening offering I arose 
up from my fasting, even with my 
garment and my mantle rent; and I fell 
upon my knees, and spread out my 
hands unto the LORD my God; 6and I 
said: ‘O my God, I am ashamed and 
blush to lift up my face to Thee, my 
God; for our iniquities are increased 
over our head, and our guiltiness is 
grown up unto the heavens. 7Since the 
days of our fathers we have been 
exceeding guilty unto this day; and for 
our iniquities have we, our kings, and 
our priests, been delivered into the 
hand of the kings of the lands, to the 
sword, to captivity, and to spoiling, 
and to confusion of face, as it is this 
day. 8And now for a little moment 
grace hath been shown from the LORD 
our God, to leave us a remnant to 
escape, and to give us a nail in His 
holy place, that our God may lighten 
our eyes, and give us a little reviving 
in our bondage. 9For we are bondmen; 
yet our God hath not forsaken us in 
our bondage, but hath extended mercy 
unto us in the sight of the kings of 
Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up 
the house of our God, and to repair the 
ruins thereof, and to give us a fence in 
Judah and in Jerusalem. 10And now, O 
our God, what shall we say after this? 
for we have forsaken Thy 
commandments, 11which Thou hast 
commanded by Thy servants the 
prophets, saying: The land, unto which 
ye go to possess it, is an unclean land 
through the uncleanness of the peoples 
of the lands, through their 
abominations, wherewith they have 
filled it from one end to another with 
their filthiness. 12Now therefore give 
not your daughters unto their sons, 
neither take their daughters unto your 
sons, nor seek their peace or their 
prosperity for ever; that ye may be 
strong, and eat the good of the land, 
and leave it for an inheritance to your 
children for ever. 13And after all that is 
come upon us for our evil deeds, and 
for our great guilt, seeing that Thou 
our God hast punished us less than our 
9 




iniquities deserve, and hast given us 
such a remnant, 14shall we again break 
Thy commandments, and make 
marriages with the peoples that do 
these abominations? wouldest not 
Thou be angry with us till Thou hadst 
consumed us, so that there should be 
no remnant, nor any to escape? 15O 
LORD, the God of Israel, Thou art 
righteous; for we are left a remnant 
that is escaped, as it is this day; 
behold, we are before Thee in our 
guiltiness; for none can stand before 
Thee because of this.’ 

Now while Ezra prayed, and 
made confession, weeping and 
casting himself down before the house 
of God, there was gathered together 
unto him out of Israel a very great 
congregation of men and women and 
children; for the people wept very 
sore. 2And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, 
one of the sons of Elam, answered and 
said unto Ezra: ‘We have broken faith 
with our God, and have married 
foreign women of the peoples of the 
land; yet now there is hope for Israel 
concerning this thing. 3Now therefore 
let us make a covenant with our God 
to put away all the wives, and such as 
are born of them, according to the 
counsel of the LORD, and of those that 
tremble at the commandment of our 
God; and let it be done according to 
the law. 4Arise; for the matter 
belongeth unto thee, and we are with 
thee; be of good courage, and do it.’ 

5Then arose Ezra, and made the 
chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and 
all Israel, to swear that they would do 
according to this word. So they swore. 
6Then Ezra rose up from before the 
house of God, and went into the 
chamber of Jehohanan the son of 
Eliashib; and when he came thither, he 
did eat no bread, nor drink water; for 
he mourned because of the 
faithlessness of them of the captivity. 
7And they made proclamation 
throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto 
all the children of the captivity, that 
they should gather themselves together 
unto Jerusalem; 8and that whosoever 
came not within three days, according 
to the counsel of the princes and the 
elders, all his substance should be 
forfeited, and himself separated from 
the congregation of the captivity. 

9Then all the men of Judah and 
Benjamin gathered themselves 
together unto Jerusalem within the 
three days; it was the ninth month, on 
the twentieth day of the month; and all 
the people sat in the broad place before 
the house of God, trembling because 
of this matter, and for the great rain. 
10And Ezra the priest stood up, and 
said unto them: ‘Ye have broken faith, 
and have married foreign women, to 
increase the guilt of Israel. 11Now 
therefore make confession unto the 
LORD, the God of your fathers, and do 
His pleasure; and separate yourselves 
from the peoples of the land, and from 
the foreign women.’ 12Then all the 
congregation answered and said with a 
loud voice: ‘As thou hast said, so it is 
for us to do. 13But the people are 
10 




many, and it is a time of much rain, 
and we are not able to stand without, 
neither is this a work of one day or 
two; for we have greatly transgressed 
in this matter. 14Let now our princes of 
all the congregation stand, and let all 
them that are in our cities that have 
married foreign women come at 
appointed times, and with them the 
elders of every city, and the judges 
thereof, until the fierce wrath of our 
God be turned from us, as touching 
this matter.’ 15Only Jonathan the son 
of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of 
Tikvah stood up against this matter; 
and Meshullam and Shabbethai the 
Levite helped them. 16And the children 
of the captivity did so. And Ezra the 
priest, with certain heads of 
fathers’houses, after their 
fathers’houses, and all of them by their 
names, were separated; and they sat 
down in the first day of the tenth 
month to examine the matter. 17And 
they were finished with all the men 
that had married foreign women by the 
first day of the first month. 

18And among the sons of the priests 
there were found that had married 
foreign women, namely: of the sons of 
Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and his 
brethren, Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and 
Jarib, and Gedaliah. 19And they gave 
their hand that they would put away 
their wives; and being guilty, [they 
offered] a ram of the flock for their 
guilt. 20And of the sons of Immer: 
Hanani and Zebadiah. 21And of the 
sons of Harim: Maaseiah, and Elijah, 
and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah. 
22And of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, 
Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, 
and Elasah. 23And of the Levites: 
Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah—
the same is Kelita—Pethahiah, Judah, 
and Eliezer. 24And of the singers: 
Eliashib; and of the porters: Shallum, 
and Telem, and Uri. 25And of Israel: of 
the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, and 
Izziah, and Malchijah, and Mijamin, 
and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and 
Benaiah. 26And of the sons of Elam: 
Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and 
Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Elijah. 27And 
of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, 
Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, 
and Aziza. 28And of the sons of Bebai: 
Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai. 
29And of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, 
Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and 
Sheal, and Ramoth. 30And of the sons 
of Pahath-moab: Adna, and Chelal, 
Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, 
Bezalel, and Binnui, and Manasseh. 
31And of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, 
Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, 
Shimeon; 32Benjamin, Malluch, 
Shemariah. 33Of the sons of Hashum: 
Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, 
Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei. 34Of the 
sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, and 
Uel; 35Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhu; 
36Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib; 
37Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasai; 
38and Bani, and Binnui, Shimei; 
39Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah; 
40Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai; 
41Azarel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah; 


42Shallum, Amariah, Joseph. 43Of the 
sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, 
Zebina, Jaddai, and Joel, Benaiah. 
44All these had taken foreign wives; 
and some of them had wives by whom 
they had children. 

 

 


