FIRST CHRONICLES 

 

ADAM, SETH, Enosh; 2Kenan, 
Mahalalel, Jared; 3Enoch, 
Methuselah, Lamech; 4Noah, Shem, 
Ham, and Japheth. 

5The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and 
Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and 
Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 6And 
the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and 
Diphath, and Togarmah. 7And the sons 
of Javan: Elishah, and Tarshish, 
Kittim, and Rodanim. 

8The sons of Ham: Cush, and 
Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. 9And the 
sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, and 
Sabta, and Raama, and Sabteca. And 
the sons of Raama: Sheba, and Dedan. 
10And Cush begot Nimrod; he began to 
be a mighty one in the earth. 11And 
Mizraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, 
and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 12and 
Pathrusim, and Casluhim—from 
whence came the Philistines—and 
Caphtorim. 13And Canaan begot Zidon 
his first-born, and Heth; 14and the 
Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the 
Girgashite; 15and the Hivite, and the 
Arkite, and the Sinite; 16and the 
Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the 
Hamathite. 

17The Sons of Shem: Elam, and 
Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and 
Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, 
and Meshech. 18And Arpachshad begot 
Shelah, and Shelah begot Eber. 19And 
unto Eber were born two sons: the 
name of the one was Peleg; for in his 
days the earth was divided; and his 
brother’s name was Joktan. 20And 
Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, 
and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah; 21and 
Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah; 22and 
Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba; 23and 
Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All 
these were the sons of Joktan. 

24Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah; 
25Eber, Peleg, Reu; 26Serug, Nahor, 
Terah; 27Abram—the same is 
Abraham. 28The sons of Abraham: 
Isaac, and Ishmael. 

29These are their generations: the 
first-born of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then 
Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 
30Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, 
and Tema, 31Jetur, Naphish, and 
Kedem. These are the sons of Ishmael. 

32And the sons of Keturah, 
Abraham’s concubine: she bore 
Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and 
Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And 
the sons of Jokshan: Sheba, and 
Dedan. 33And the sons of Midian: 
Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and 
Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the 
sons of Keturah. 

34And Abraham begot Isaac. The 
sons of Isaac: Esau, and Israel. 

35The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, 
and Jeush, and Jalam and Korah. 36The 
sons of Eliphaz: Teman, and Omar, 
Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, 
1 




and Amalek. 37The sons of Reuel: 
Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. 
38And the sons of Seir: Lotan, and 
Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and 
Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan. 39And 
the sons of Lotan: Hori, and Homam; 
and Timna was Lotan’s sister. 40The 
sons of Shobal: Alian, and Manahath, 
and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the 
sons of Zibeon: Aiah, and Anah. 41The 
sons of Anah: Dishon. And the sons of 
Dishon: Hamran, and Eshban, and 
Ithran, and Cheran. 42The sons of Ezer: 
Bilhan, and Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons 
of Dishan: Uz, and Aran. 

43Now these are the kings that 
reigned in the land of Edom, before 
their reigned any king over the 
children of Israel: Bela the son of 
Beor; and the name of his city was 
Dinhabah. 44And Bela died, and Jobab 
the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in 
his stead. 45And Jobab died, and 
Husham of the land of the Temanites 
reigned in his stead. 46And Husham 
died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, 
who smote Midian in the field of 
Moab, reigned in his stead; and the 
name of his city was Avith. 47And 
Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah 
reigned in his stead. 48And Samlah 
died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the 
River reigned in his stead. 49And Shaul 
died, and Baal-hanan the son of 
Achbor reigned in his stead. 50And 
Baal-hanan died, and Hadad reigned in 
his stead; and the name of his city was 
Pai; and his wife’s name was 
Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the 
daughter of Mezahab. 51And Hadad 
died. 

And the chiefs of Edom were: the 
chief of Timna, the chief of Alvah, the 
chief of Jetheth; 52the chief of 
Oholibamah, the chief of Elah, the 
chief of Pinon; 53the chief of Kenaz, 
the chief of Teman, the chief of 
Mibzar; 54the chief of Magdiel, the 
chief of Iram. These are the chiefs of 
Edom. 

These are the sons of Israel: 
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 
Issachar, and Zebulun; 2Dan, Joseph, 
and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and 
Asher. 

3The sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, 
and Shelah; which three were born 
unto him of Bath-shua the 
Canaanitess. And Er, Judah’s first-
born, was wicked in the sight of the 
LORD; and He slew him. 4And Tamar 
his daughter-in-law bore him Perez 
and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were 
five. 

5The sons of Perez: Hezron, and 
Hamul. 6And the sons of Zerah: Zimri, 
and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, 
and Dara: five of them in all. 7And the 
sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of 
Israel, who committed a trespass 
concerning the devoted thing. 8And the 
sons of Ethan: Azariah. 

9The sons also of Hezron, that were 
born unto him: Jerahmeel, and Ram, 
and Chelubai. 10And Ram begot 
Amminadab; and Amminadab begot 
Nahshon, prince of the children of 
Judah; 11and Nahshon begot Salma, 
2 




and Salma begot Boaz; 12and Boaz 
begot Obed, and Obed begot Jesse; 
13and Jesse begot his first-born Eliab, 
and Abinadab the second, and Shimea 
the third; 14Nethanel the fourth, Raddai 
the fifth; 15Ozem the sixth, David the 
seventh. 16And their sisters were 
Zeruiah and Abigail. And the sons of 
Zeruiah: aAbishai, and Joab, and 
Asahel, three. 17And Abigail bore 
Amasa; and the father of Amasa was 
Jether the Ishmaelite. 

a Heb. Abshai. 

18And Caleb the son of Hezron 
begot children of Azubah his wife—
and of Jerioth—and these were her 
sons: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon. 
19And Azubah died, and Caleb took 
unto him Ephrath, who bore him Hur. 
20And Hur begot Uri, and Uri begot 
Bezalel. 

21And afterward Hezron went in to 
the daughter of Machir the father of 
Gilead; whom he took to wife when he 
was threescore years old; and she bore 
him Segub. 22And Segub begot Jair, 
who had three and twenty cities in the 
land of Gilead. 23And Geshur and 
Aram took Havvoth-jair from them, 
with Kenath, and the villages thereof, 
even threescore cities. All these were 
the sons of Machir the father of 
Gilead. 24And after that Hezron was 
dead in Caleb-ephrath, then Abiah 
Hezron’s wife bore him Ashhur the 
father of Tekoa. 

25And the sons of Jerahmeel the 
first-born of Hezron were Ram the 

first-born, and Bunah, and Oren, and 
Ozem, Ahijah. 26And Jerahmeel had 
another wife, whose name was Atarah; 
she was the mother of Onam. 

27And the sons of Ram the first-
born of Jerahmeel were Maaz, and 
Jamin, and Eker. 28And the sons of 
Onam were Shammai, and Jada; and 
the sons of Shammai: Nadab, and 
Abishur. 29And the name of the wife of 
Abishur was Abihail; and she bore him 
Ahban, and Molid. 30And the sons of 
Nadab: Seled, and Appaim; but Seled 
died without children. 31And the sons 
of Appaim: Ishi. And the sons of Ishi: 
Sheshan. And the sons of Sheshan: 
Ahlai. 32And the sons of Jada the 
brother of Shammai: Jether, and 
Jonathan: and Jether died without 
children. 33And the sons of Jonathan: 
Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons 
of Jerahmeel. 

34Now Sheshan had no sons, but 
daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, 
an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha. 
35So Sheshan gave his daughter to 
Jarha his servant to wife; and she bore 
him Attai. 36And Attai begot Nathan, 
and Nathan begot Zabad; 37and Zabad 
begot Ephlal, and Ephlal begot Obed; 
38and Obed begot Jehu, and Jehu begot 
Azariah; 39and Azariah begot Helez, 
and Helez begot Eleasah; 40and 
Eleasah begot Sisamai, and Sisamai 
begot Shallum; 41and Shallum begot 
Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begot 
Elishama. 

42And the sons of Caleb the brother 
of Jerahmeel were Mesha his first-


born, who was the father of Ziph, and 
the sons of Mareshah the father of 
Hebron. 43And the sons of Hebron: 
Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and 
Shema. 44And Shema begot Raham, 
the father of Jorkeam; and Rekem 
begot Shammai. 45And the son of 
Shammai was Maon; and Maon was 
the father of Beth-zur. 46And Ephah, 
Caleb’s concubine, bore Haran, and 
Moza, and Gazez; and Haran begot 
Gazez. 47And the sons of Jahdai: 
Regem, and Jotham, and Geshan, and 
Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph. 
48Maacah, Caleb’s concubine, bore 
Sheber and Tirhanah. 49And [the wife 
of] Shaaph the father of Madmannah 
bore Sheva the father of Machbenah 
and the father of Gibea. And the 
daughter of Caleb was Achsah. 

50These were the sons of Caleb. 

The sons of Hur the first-born of 
Ephrath: Shobal the father of Kiriath-
jearim; 51Salma the father of Beth-
lehem, Hareph the father of Beth-
gader. 52And Shobal the father of 
Kiriath-jearim had sons: Haroeh, and 
half of the Menuhoth. 53And the 
families of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, 
and the Puthites, and the Shumathites, 
and the Mishraites; of them came the 
Zorathites, and the Eshtaolites. 

54The sons of Salma: Beth-lehem, 
and the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-
joab, and half of the Manahathites, the 
Zorites. 55And the families of scribes 
that dwelt at Jabez: the Tirathites, the 
Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are 
the Kenites that came of Hammath, the 
father of the house of Rechab. 

Now these were the sons of 
David, that were born unto him in 
Hebron: the first-born, Amnon, of 
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, 
Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess; 
2the third, Absalom the son of Maacah 
the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; 
the fourth, Adonijah the son of 
Haggith; 3the fifth, Shephatiah of 
Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his 
wife. 4Six were born unto him in 
Hebron; and there he reigned seven 
years and six months; and in Jerusalem 
he reigned thirty and three years. 

5And these were born unto him in 
Jerusalem: Shimea, and Shobab, and 
Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath-
shua the daughter of Ammiel; 6and 
Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet; 
7and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia; 
8and Elishama, and Eliada, and 
Eliphelet, nine. 9All these were the 
sons of David, beside the sons of the 
concubines; and Tamar was their 
sister. 

10And Solomon’s son was 
Rehoboam; Abijah his son, Asa his 
son, Jehoshaphat his son; 11Joram his 
son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son; 
12Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, 
Jotham his son; 13Ahaz his son, 
Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son; 
14Amon his son, Josiah his son. 15And 
the sons of Josiah: the firstborn 
Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the 
third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum. 
3 




16And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah 
his son, Zedekiah his son. 

17And the sons of Jeconiah—the 
same is Assir—Shealtiel his son; 18and 
Malchiram, and Pedaiah, and 
Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and 
Nedabiah. 19And the sons of Pedaiah: 
Zerubbabel, and Shimei. And the sons 
of Zerubbabel: Meshullam, and 
Hananiah; and Shelomith was their 
sister; 20and Hashubah and Ohel, and 
Berechiah, and Hasadiah, 
Jushabhesed, five. 21And the sons of 
Hananiah: Pelatiah, and Jeshaiah; the 
sons of [Jeshaiah]: Rephaiah; the sons 
of [Rephaiah]: Arnan; the sons of 
[Arnan]: Obadiah; the sons of 
[Obadiah]: Shecaniah. 22And the sons 
of Shecaniah: Shemaiah; and the sons 
of Shemaiah: Hattush, and Igal, and 
Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six. 
23And the sons of Neariah: Elioenai, 
and Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three. 
24And the sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, 
and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, 
and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, 
seven. 

4 



The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, 
and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal. 
2And Reaiah the son of Shobal begot 
Jahath; and Jahath begot Ahumai, and 
Lahad. These are the families of the 
Zorathites. 

3And these were [the sons of] the 
father of Etam: Jezreel, and Ishma, and 
Idbash; and the name of their sister 
was Hazlelponi; 4and Penuel the father 
of Gedor, and Ezer the father of 
Hushah. These are the sons of Hur the 
first-born of Ephrath, the father of 
Beth-lehem. 

5And Ashhur the father of Tekoa 
had two wives, Helah and Naarah. 
6And Naarah bore him Ahuzam, and 
Hepher, and Timeni, and Ahashtari. 
These were the sons of Naarah. 7And 
the sons of Helah were Zereth, and 
Zohar, and Ethnan. 8And Koz begot 
Anub, and Zobebah, and the families 
of Aharhel the son of Harum. 9And 
Jabez was more honourable than his 
brethren; and his mother called his 
name Jabez, saying: ‘Because I bore 
him with pain.’ 10And Jabez called on 
the God of Israel, saying: ‘Oh that 
Thou wouldest bless me indeed, and 
enlarge my border, and that Thy hand 
might be with me, and that Thou 
wouldest work deliverance from evil, 
that it may not pain me! ’ And God 
granted him that which he requested. 

11And Chelub the brother of 
Shuhah begot Mehir, who was the 
father of Eshton. 12And Eshton begot 
Beth-rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah 
the father of Ir-nahash. These are the 
men of Recah. 

13And the sons of Kenaz: Othniel, 
and Seraiah; and the sons of Othniel: 
Hathath. 14And Meonothai begot 
Ophrah; and Seraiah begot Joab the 
father of aGe-harashim; for they were 
craftsmen. 15And the sons of Caleb the 
son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and 
Naam; and the sons of Elah: Kenaz. 
16And the sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, and 

a That is, The valley of craftsmen. 


Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel. 17And the 
sons of Ezrah: Jether, and Mered, and 
Epher, and Jalon. And she bore 
Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the 
father of Eshtemoa—18and his wife 
Hajehudijah bore Jered the father of 
Gedor, and Heber the father of Soco, 
and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah—
and these are the sons of Bithiah the 
daughter of Pharaoh whom Mered 
took. 

19And the sons of the wife of 
Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the 
father of Keilah the Garmite, and 
Eshtemoa the Maacathite. 20And the 
sons of Shimon: Amnon, and Rinnah, 
Ben-hanan, and Tilon. And the sons of 
Ishi: Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth. 

21The sons of Shelah the son of 
Judah: Er the father of Lecah, and 
Ladah the father of Mareshah, and the 
families of the house of them that 
wrought fine linen, of the house of 
Ashbea; 22and Jokim, and the men of 
Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who 
had dominion in Moab, and Jashubi-
lehem. And the records are ancient. 
23These were the potters, and those 
that dwelt among plantations and 
hedges; there they dwelt occupied in 
the king’s work. 

24The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, and 
Jamim, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul; 25Shallum 
his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his 
son. 26And the sons of Mishma: 
Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, 
Shimei his son. 27And Shimei had 
sixteen sons and six daughters; but his 
brethren had not many children, 
neither did all their family multiply, 
like to the children of Judah. 

28And they dwelt at Beer-sheba, 
and Moladah, and Hazar-shual; 29and 
at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad; 
30and at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and 
at Ziklag; 31and at Beth-marcaboth, 
and Hazar-susim, and at Beth-biri, and 
at Shaaraim. These were their cities 
unto the reign of David. 32And their 
villages were Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, 
and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities; 
33and all their villages that were round 
about the same cities, unto Baal. These 
were their habitations, and they have 
their genealogy. 

34And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and 
Joshah the son of Amaziah; 35and Joel, 
and Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son 
of Seraiah, the son of Asiel; 36and 
Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshoaiah, 
and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, 
and Benaiah; 37and Ziza the son of 
Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of 
Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of 
Shemaiah; 38these mentioned by name 
were princes in their families; and 
their fathers’houses increased greatly. 
39And they went to the entrance of 
Gedor, even unto the east side of the 
valley, to seek pasture for their flocks. 
40And they found fat pasture and good, 
and the land was wide, and quiet, and 
peaceable; for they that dwelt there 
aforetime were of Ham. 41And these 
written by name came in the days of 
Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote 
their tents, and the Meunim that were 
found there, and destroyed them 


utterly, unto this day, and dwelt in 
their stead; because there was pasture 
there for their flocks. 42And some of 
them, even of the sons of Simeon, five 
hundred men, went to mount Seir, 
having for their captains Pelatiah, and 
Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the 
sons of Ishi. 43And they smote the 
remnant of the Amalekites that 
escaped, and dwelt there unto this day. 

And the sons of Reuben the first-
born of Israel—for he was the 
first-born; but, forasmuch as he defiled 
his father’s couch, his birthright was 
given unto the sons of Joseph the son 
of Israel, yet not so that he was to be 
reckoned in the genealogy as first-
born. 2For Judah prevailed above his 
brethren, and of him came he that is 
the prince; but the birthright was 
Joseph’s— 3the sons of Reuben the 
first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, 
Hezron, and Carmi. 4The sons of Joel: 
Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei 
his son; 5Micah his son, Reaiah his 
son, Baal his son; 6Beerah his son, 
whom Tillegath-pilneser king of 
Assyria carried away captive; he was 
prince of the Reubenites. 7And his 
brethren by their families, when the 
genealogy of their generations was 
reckoned: the chief Jeiel, and 
Zechariah, 8and Bela the son of Azaz, 
the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who 
dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and 
Baal-meon; 9and eastward he dwelt 
even unto the entrance of the 
wilderness from the river Euphrates; 
because their cattle were multiplied in 
the land of Gilead. 10And in the days 
of Saul they made war with the 
Hagrites, who fell by their hand; and 
they dwelt in their tents throughout all 
the land east of Gilead. 

11And the sons of Gad dwelt over 
against them, in the land of Bashan 
unto Salcah: 12Joel the chief, and 
Shapham the second, and Janai, and 
Shaphat in Bashan; 13and their 
brethren of their fathers’houses: 
Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, 
and Jorai, and Jacan, and Zia, and 
Eber, seven. 14These were the sons of 
Abihail the son of Huri, the son of 
Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of 
Michael, the son of Jehishai, the son of 
Jahdo, the son of Buz; 15Ahi the son of 
Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of their 
fathers’houses. 16And they dwelt in 
Gilead in Bashan, and in the towns 
thereof, and in all the open lands of the 
plain, upon their borders. 17All these 
were reckoned by genealogies in the 
days of Jotham king of Judah and in 
the days of Jeroboam king of Israel. 

18The sons of Reuben, and the 
Gadites, and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh, as many as were valiant 
men, men able to bear buckler and 
sword, and to shoot with bow, and 
skilful in war, were forty and four 
thousand seven hundred and 
threescore, that were able to go forth 
to war. 19And they made war with the 
Hagrites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and 
Nodab. 20And they were helped against 
them, and the Hagrites were delivered 
into their hand, and all that were with 
5 




them; for they cried to God in the 
battle, and He was entreated of them, 
because they put their trust in Him. 
21And they took away their cattle: of 
their camels fifty thousand, and of 
sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, 
and of asses two thousand; and of 
souls of men a hundred thousand. 
22For there fell many slain, because the 
war was of God. And they dwelt in 
their stead until the captivity. 

23And the children of the half-tribe 
of Manasseh dwelt in the land, from 
Bashan unto Baal-hermon and Senir 
and mount Hermon, where they 
increased. 24And these were the heads 
of their fathers’houses: Epher, and 
Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and 
Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, 
mighty men of valour, famous men, 
heads of their fathers’houses. 

25And they broke faith with the 
God of their fathers, and went astray 
after the gods of the peoples of the 
land, whom God destroyed before 
them. 26And the God of Israel stirred 
up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, 
and the spirit of Tillegath-pilneser king 
of Assyria, and he carried them away, 
even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and 
brought them unto Halah, and Habor, 
and Hara, and to the river of Gozan, 
unto this day. 

27The sons of Levi: Gershon, 
Kohath, and Merari. 28And the sons of 
Kohath: Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, 
and Uzziel. 29And the children of 
Amram: Aaron, and Moses, and 
Miriam. And the sons of Aaron: Nadab 
and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 
30Eleazar begot Phinehas, Phinehas 
begot Abishua; 31and Abishua begot 
Bukki, and Bukki begot Uzzi; 32and 
Uzzi begot Zerahiah, and Zerahiah 
begot Meraioth; 33Meraioth begot 
Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub; 
34and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok 
begot Ahimaaz; 35and Ahimaaz begot 
Azariah, and Azariah begot Johanan; 
36and Johanan begot Azariah—he it is 
that executed the priest’s office in the 
house that Solomon built in 
Jerusalem—:37and Azariah begot 
Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub; 
38and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok 
begot Shallum; 39and Shallum begot 
Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begot Azariah; 
40and Azariah begot Seraiah, and 
Seraiah begot Jehozadak; 41and 
Jehozadak went into captivity, when 
the LORD carried away Judah and 
Jerusalem by the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

The sons of Levi: Gershom, 
Kohath and Merari. 2And these 
are the names of the sons of Gershom: 
Libni, and Shimei. 3And the sons of 
Kohath were Amram, and Izhar, and 
Hebron, and Uzziel. 4The sons of 
Merari: Mahli, and Mushi. And these 
are the families of the Levites 
according to their fathers’houses. 

5Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath 
his son, Zimmah his son; 6Joah his 
son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, 
Jeatherai his son. 
6 




7The sons of Kohath: Amminadab 
his son, Korah his son, Assir his son; 
8Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his 
son, and Assir his son; 9Tahath his son, 
Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and 
Shaul his son. 10And the sons of 
Elkanah: Amasai, and Ahimoth. 11As 
for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah: 
Zophai his son, and Nahath his son; 
12Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, 
Elkanah his son. 13And the sons of 
Samuel: the first-born Vashni; then 
Abiah. 

14The sons of Merari: Mahli; Libni 
his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son; 
15Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, 
Asaiah his son. 

16And these are they whom David 
set over the service of song in the 
house of the LORD, after that the ark 
had rest. 17And they ministered with 
song before the tabernacle of the tent 
of meeting, until Solomon had built 
the house of the LORD in Jerusalem; 
and they took their station at their 
service according to their order. 18And 
these are they that took their station, 
and their sons. Of the sons of the 
Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son 
of Joel, the son of Samuel; 19the son of 
Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son 
of Eliel, the son of Toah; 20the son of 
Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of 
Mahath, the son of Amasai; 21the son 
of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of 
Azariah, the son of Zephaniah; 22the 
son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son 
of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah; 23the 
son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the 
son of Levi, the son of Israel. 24And 
his brother Asaph, who stood on his 
right hand; even Asaph the son of 
Berechiah, the son of Shimea; 25the 
son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, 
the son of Malchijah; 26the son of 
Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of 
Adaiah; 27the son of Ethan, the son of 
Zimmah, the son of Shimei; 28the son 
of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son 
of Levi. 29And on the left hand their 
brethren the sons of Merari: Ethan the 
son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son 
of Malluch; 30the son of Hashabiah, 
the son of Amaziah, the son of 
Hilkiah; 31the son of Amzi, the son of 
Bani, the son of Shemer; 32the son of 
Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of 
Merari, the son of Levi. 33And their 
brethren the Levites were appointed 
for all the service of the tabernacle of 
the house of God. 

34But Aaron and his sons offered 
upon the altar of burnt-offering, and 
upon the altar of incense, for all the 
work of the most holy place, and to 
make atonement for Israel, according 
to all that Moses the servant of God 
had commanded. 35And these are the 
sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, 
Phinehas his son, Abishua his son; 
36Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah 
his son; 37Meraioth his son, Amariah 
his son, Ahitub his son; 38Zadok his 
son, Ahimaaz his son. 

39Now these are their dwelling-
places according to their encampments 
in their borders: to the sons of Aaron, 
of the families of the Kohathites, for 


theirs was the [first] lot, 40to them they 
gave Hebron in the land of Judah, and 
the open land round about it; 41but the 
fields of the city, and the villages 
thereof, they gave to Caleb the son of 
Jephunneh. 42And to the sons of Aaron 
they gave the acity of refuge, Hebron; 
Libnah also with the open land about 
it, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa with the 
open land about it; 43and Hilen with 
the open land about it, Debir with the 
open land about it; 44and Ashan with 
the open land about it, and Beth-
shemesh with the open land about it; 
45and out of the tribe of Benjamin: 
Geba with the open land about it, and 
Alemeth with the open land about it, 
and Anathoth with the open land about 
it. All their cities throughout their 
families were thirteen cities. 

a Heb. Cities. 

46And unto the rest of the sons of 
Kohath were given by lot, out of the 
family of the tribe, out of the half-
tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities. 
47And to the sons of Gershom, 
according to their families, out of the 
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of 
Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, 
and out of the tribe of Manasseh in 
Bashan, thirteen cities. 48Unto the sons 
of Merari were given by lot, according 
to their families, out of the tribe of 
Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, 
and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve 
cities. 

49So the children of Israel gave to 
the Levites the cities with the open 

land about them. 50And they gave by 
lot out of the tribe of the children of 
Judah, and out of the tribe of the 
children of Simeon, and out of the 
tribe of the children of Benjamin, these 
cities which are mentioned by name. 

51And some of the families of the 
sons of Kohath had cities of their 
borders out of the tribe of Ephraim. 
52And they gave unto them the bcity of 
refuge, Shechem in the hill-country of 
Ephraim with the open land about it; 
Gezer also with the open land about it; 
53and Jokmeam with the open land 
about it, and Bethhoron with the open 
land about it; 54and Aijalon with the 
open land about it, and Gath-rimmon 
with the open land about it; 55and out 
of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Aner 
with the open land about it, and 
Bileam with the open land about it, for 
the rest of the family of the sons of 
Kohath. 

b Heb. Cities. 

56Unto the sons of Gershom were 
given, out of the family of the half-
tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan 
with the open land about it, and 
Ashtaroth with the open land about it; 
57and out of the tribe of Issachar: 
Kedesh with the open land about it, 
Dobrath with the open land about it; 
58and Ramoth with the open land about 
it, and Anem with the open land about 
it; 59and out of the tribe of Asher: 
Mashal with the open land about it, 
and Abdon with the open land about it; 
60and Hukok with the open land about 


it; and Rehob with the open land about 
it; 61and out of the tribe of Naphtali: 
Kedesh in Galilee with the open land 
about it, and Hammon with the open 
land about it, and Kiriathaim with the 
open land about it. 

62Unto the rest [of the Levites], the 
sons of Merari, were given, out of the 
tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with the 
open land about it, Tabor with the 
open land about it; 63and beyond the 
Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of 
the Jordan, were given them, out of the 
tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the 
wilderness with the open land about it, 
and Jahaz with the open land about it, 
64and Kedemoth with the open land 
about it, and Mephaath with the open 
land about it; 65and out of the tribe of 
Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with the open 
land about it, and Mahanaim with the 
open land about it, 66and Heshbon with 
the open land about it, and Jazer with 
the open land about it. 

7 



And of the sons of Issachar: Tola, 
and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, 
four. 2And the sons of Tola: Uzzi and 
Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and 
Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their 
fathers’houses, mighty men of valour 
according to their generations, even of 
Tola; their number in the days of 
David was two and twenty thousand 
and six hundred. 3And the sons of 
Uzzi: Izrahiah; and the sons of 
Izrahiah: Michael, and Obadiah, and 
Joel, Isshiah, five; all of them chief 
men. 4And with them, by their 
generations, after their fathers’houses, 
were bands of the host for war, six and 
thirty thousand; for they had many 
wives and sons. 5And their brethren 
among all the families of Issachar, 
mighty men of valour, reckoned in all 
by genealogy, were fourscore and 
seven thousand. 

6[The sons of] Benjamin: Bela, and 
Becher, and Jediael, three. 7And the 
sons of Bela: Ezbon, and Uzzi, and 
Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; 
heads of fathers’houses, mighty men 
of valour; and they were reckoned by 
genealogy twenty and two thousand 
and thirty and four. 8And the sons of 
Becher: Zemirah, and Joash, and 
Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and 
Jeremoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, 
and Alemeth. All these were the sons 
of Becher. 9And they were reckoned 
by genealogy, after their generations, 
heads of their fathers’houses, mighty 
men of valour, twenty thousand and 
two hundred. 10And the sons of 
Jediael: Bilhan; and the sons of 
Bilhan: Jeush, and Benjamin, and 
Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and 
Tarshish, and Ahishahar. 11All these 
were sons of Jediael, even heads of 
their fathers’houses, mighty men of 
valour, seventeen thousand and two 
hundred, that were able to go forth in 
the host for war. 12Shuppim also, and 
Huppim, the sons of Ir, Hushim, the 
son of aanother. 

a That is, Dan. 


13The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and 
Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons 
of Bilhah. 

14The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, 
whom his wife bore—his concubine 
the Aramitess bore Machir the father 
of Gilead; 15and Machir took a wife of 
Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister’s 
name was Maacah—and the name of 
the second was Zelophehad; and 
Zelophehad had daughters. 16And 
Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, 
and she called his name Peresh; and 
the name of his brother was Sheresh; 
and his sons were Ulam and Rekem. 
17And the sons of Ulam: Bedan. These 
were the sons of Gilead the son of 
Machir, the son of Manasseh. 18And 
his sister Hammolecheth bore Ish-hod, 
and Abiezer, and Mahlah. 19And the 
sons of Shemida were Ahian, and 
Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam. 

20And the sons of Ephraim: 
Shuthelah—and Bered was his son, 
and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his 
son, and Tahath his son, 21and Zabad 
his son, and Shuthelah his son—and 
Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of 
Gath that were born in the land slew, 
because they came down to take away 
their cattle. 22And Ephraim their father 
mourned many days, and his brethren 
came to comfort him. 23And he went in 
to his wife, and she conceived, and 
bore a son, and he called his name 
Beriah, because ait went evil with his 
house. 24And his daughter was 

a Heb. Beraah. 

Sheerah, who built Beth-horon the 
nether and the upper, and Uzzen-
sheerah. 25And Rephah was his son, 
and Resheph, and Telah his son, and 
Tahan his son; 26Ladan his son, 
Ammihud his son, Elishama his son; 
27bNun his son, Joshua his son. 28And 
their possessions and habitations were 
Beth-el and the towns thereof, and 
eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, 
with the towns thereof; Shechem also 
and the towns thereof, unto Aiah and 
the towns thereof; 29and by the borders 
of the children of Manasseh, Beth-
shean and the towns thereof, Taanach 
and the towns thereof, Megiddo and 
the towns thereof, Dor and the towns 
thereof. In these dwelt the children of 
Joseph the son of Israel. 

b Heb. Non. 

30The sons of Asher: Imnah, and 
Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and 
Serah their sister. 31And the sons of 
Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel, who was 
the father of Birzaith. 32And Heber 
begot Japhlet, and Shomer, and 
Hotham, and Shua their sister. 33And 
the sons of Japhlet: Pasach, and 
Bimhal, and Asvath. These are the 
children of Japhlet. 34And the sons of 
Shemer: Ahi, and Rohgah, and 
Hubbah, and Aram. 35And the sons of 
Helem his brother: Zophah, and Imna, 
and Shelesh, and Amal. 36The sons of 
Zophah: Suah, and Harnepher, and 
Shaul, and Beri, and Imrah; 37Bezer, 
and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilsha, 
and Ithran, and Beera. 38And the sons 


of Jether: Jephunneh, and Pispa, and 
Ara. 39And the sons of Ulla: Arah, and 
Hanniel, and Rizia. 40All these were 
the children of Asher, heads of the 
fathers’houses, choice and mighty men 
of valour, chief of the princes. And the 
number of them reckoned by 
genealogy for service in war was 
twenty and six thousand men. 

 

8 



And Benjamin begot Bela his 
first-born, Ashbel the second, and 
Aharah the third; 2Nohah the fourth, 
and Rapha the fifth. 3And Bela had 
sons, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud; 
4and Abishua, and Naaman, and 
Ahoah; 5and Gera, and Shephuphan, 
and Huram. 6And these are the sons of 
Ehud—these are the heads of 
fathers’houses of the inhabitants of 
Geba, and they were carried captive to 
Manahath; 7and Naaman, and Ahijah, 
and Gera, were they that carried them 
captive—and he begot Uzza, and 
Ahihud. 8And Shaharaim begot 
children in the field of Moab, after he 
had sent them away, to wit, Hushim 
and Baara his wives; 9he begot of 
Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and 
Mesha, and Malcam; 10and Jeuz, and 
Sachiah, and Mirmah. These were his 
sons, heads of fathers’houses. 11and of 
Hushim he begot Abitub, and Elpaal. 

12And the sons of Elpaal: Eber, and 
Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono, 
and Lod, with the towns thereof; 13and 
Beriah, and Shema, who were heads of 
fathers’houses of the inhabitants of 
Aijalon, who put to flight the 
inhabitants of Gath. 14And Ahio, 
Shashak, and Jeremoth; 15and 
Zebadiah, and Arad, and Eder; 16and 
Michael, and Ishpah, and Joha, were 
the sons of Beriah. 17And Zebadiah, 
and Meshullam, and Hizki, and Heber; 
18and Ishmerai, and Izliah, and Jobab, 
were the sons of Elpaal. 19And Jakim, 
and Zichri, and Zabdi; 20and Elienai, 
and Zillethai, and Eliel; 21and Adaiah, 
and Beraiah, and Shimrath, were the 
sons of Shimei. 22And Ishpan, and 
Ebed, and Eliel; 23and Abdon, and 
Zichri, and Hanan; 24and Hananiah, 
and Elam, and Anthothiah; 25and 
Iphdeiah, and Penuel, were the sons of 
Shashak. 26And Shamsherai, and 
Shehariah, and Athaliah; 27and 
Jaareshiah, and Elijah, and Zichri, 
were the sons of Jeroham. 28These 
were heads of fathers’houses 
throughout their generations, chief 
men; these dwelt in Jerusalem. 

29And in Gibeon there dwelt the 
father of Gibeon [, aJeiel], whose 
wife’s name was Maacah; 30and his 
first-born son Abdon, and Zur, and 
Kish, and Baal, and Nadab; 31and 
Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecher. 32And 
Mikloth begot Shimeah. And they also 
dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, 
over against their brethren. 

a See ch. ix. 35. 

33And Ner begot Kish; and Kish 
begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, 
and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and 
Eshbaal. 34And the son of Jonathan 
was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begot 


Micah. 35And the sons of Micah; 
Pithon, and Melech, and Taarea, and 
Ahaz. 36And Ahaz begot Jehoaddah; 
and Jehoaddah begot Alemeth, and 
Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot 
Moza; 37and Moza begot Binea; 
Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, 
Azel his son. 38And Azel had six sons, 
whose names are these: Azrikam, 
Bocru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were 
the sons of Azel. 39And the sons of 
Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, 
Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the 
third. 40And the sons of Ulam were 
mighty men of valour, archers; and 
had many sons, and sons’sons, a 
hundred and fifty. All these were of 
the sons of Benjamin. 

 

So all Israel were reckoned by 
genealogies; and, behold, they are 
written in the book of the kings of 
Israel; and Judah was carried away 
captive to Babylon because of their 
transgression. 2Now the first 
inhabitants that dwelt in their 
possessions in their cities were, 
Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and 
the Nethinim. 3And in Jerusalem dwelt 
of the children of Judah, and of the 
children of Benjamin, and of the 
children of Ephraim and Manasseh: 
4Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of 
Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, 
of the children of Perez the son of 
Judah. 5And of the Shilonites: Asaiah 
the first-born and his sons. 6And of the 
sons of Zerah: Jeuel, and their 
brethren, six hundred and ninety. 7And 
of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son 
of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, 
the son of Hassenuah, 8and Ibneiah the 
son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of 
Uzzi, the son of Michri, and 
Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the 
son of Reuel, the son of Ibneiah; 9and 
their brethren, according to their 
generations, nine hundred and fifty 
and six. All these men were heads of 
fathers’houses by their fathers’houses. 

10And of the priests: Jedaiah, and 
Jehoiarib, and Jachin; 11and Azariah 
the son of Hilkiah, the son of 
Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son 
of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the 
ruler of the house of God; 12and 
Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of 
Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and 
Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of 
Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the 
son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer; 
13and their brethren, heads of their 
fathers’houses, a thousand and seven 
hundred and threescore; very able men 
for the work of the service of the 
house of God. 

14And of the Levites: Shemaiah the 
son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, 
the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of 
Merari; 15and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and 
Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, 
the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph; 
16and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, 
the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, 
and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son 
of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages 
of the Netophathites. 
9 




17And the porters: Shallum, and 
Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and 
their brother Shallum the chief; 18who 
hitherto waited in the king’s gate 
eastward; they were the porters for the 
camp of the children of Levi. 19And 
Shallum the son of Kore, the son of 
Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his 
brethren, of his father’s house, the 
Korahites, were over the work of the 
service, keepers of the gates of the 
Tent; and their fathers had been over 
the camp of the LORD, keepers of the 
entry; 20and Phinehas the son of 
Eleazar was ruler over them in time 
past, the LORD being with him. 
21Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah 
was porter of the door of the tent of 
meeting. 22All these that were chosen 
to be porters in the gates were two 
hundred and twelve. These were 
reckoned by genealogy in their 
villages, whom David and Samuel the 
seer did ordain in their set office. 23So 
they and their children had the 
oversight of the gates of the house of 
the LORD, even the house of the Tent, 
by wards. 24On the four sides were the 
porters, toward the east, west, north, 
and south. 25And their brethren, in 
their villages, were to come in every 
seven days from time to time to be 
with them; 26for the four chief porters 
were in a set office. These were the 
Levites. 

They were also over the chambers 
and over the treasuries in the house of 
God. 27And they lodged round about 
the house of God, because the charge 
thereof was upon them, and to them 
pertained the opening thereof morning 
by morning. 28And certain of them had 
charge of the vessels of service; for by 
tale were they brought in and by tale 
were they taken out. 29Some of them 
also were appointed over the furniture, 
and over all the holy vessels, and over 
the fine flour, and the wine, and the 
oil, and the frankincense, and the 
spices. 30And some of the sons of the 
priests prepared the confection of the 
spices. 31And Mattithiah, one of the 
Levites, who was the firstborn of 
Shallum the Korahite, had the set 
office over the things that were baked 
on griddles. 32And some of their 
brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, 
were over the showbread, to prepare it 
every sabbath. 

33And these are the singers, heads 
of fathers’houses of the Levites, who 
dwelt in the chambers and were free 
from other service; for they were 
employed in their work day and night. 
34These were heads of fathers’houses 
of the Levites, by their generations, 
chief men; these dwelt at Jerusalem. 

35And in Gibeon there dwelt the 
father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife’s 
name was Maacah; 36and his first-born 
son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and 
Baal, and Ner, and Nadab; 37and 
Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and 
Mikloth. 38And Mikloth begot 
Shimeam. And they also dwelt with 
their brethren in Jerusalem, over 
against their brethren. 


39And Ner begot Kish; and Kish 
begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, 
and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and 
Eshbaal. 40And the son of Jonathan 
was Merib-baal; and aMerib-baal begot 
Micah. 41And the sons of Micah: 
Pithon, and Melech, and Taharea[,band 
Ahaz]. 42And Ahaz begot Jarah; and 
Jarah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, 
and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza. 
43And Moza begot Binea; and 
Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, 
Azel his son. 44And Azel had six sons, 
whose names are these: Azrikam, 
Bocru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan; these were the 
sons of Azel. 

a Heb. Meri-baal. 

b See ch. viii, 35. 

 

Now the Philistines fought 
against Israel; and the men of 
Israel fled from before the Philistines, 
and fell down slain in mount Gilboa. 
2And the Philistines followed hard 
after Saul and after his sons; and the 
Philistines slew Jonathan, and 
Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons 
of Saul. 3And the battle went sore 
against Saul, and the archers overtook 
him; and he was in anguish by reason 
of the archers. 4Then said Saul unto his 
armour-bearer: ‘Draw thy sword, and 
thrust me through therewith; lest these 
uncircumcised come and make a mock 
of me.’ But his armour-bearer would 
not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore 
Saul took his sword, and fell upon it. 

5And when his armour-bearer saw that 
Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon 
his sword, and died. 6So Saul died, and 
his three sons; and all his house died 
together. 7And when all the men of 
Israel that were in the valley saw that 
[Israel] fled, and that Saul and his sons 
were dead, they forsook their cities, 
and fled; and the Philistines came and 
dwelt in them. 

8And it came to pass on the 
morrow, when the Philistines came to 
strip the slain, that they found Saul and 
his sons fallen in mount Gilboa. 9And 
they stripped him, and took his head, 
and his armour, and sent into the land 
of the Philistines round about, to carry 
the tidings unto their idols, and to the 
people. 10And they put his armour in 
the house of their gods, and fastened 
his head in the house of Dagon. 11And 
when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that 
the Philistines had done to Saul, 12all 
the valiant men arose, and took away 
the body of Saul, and the bodies of his 
sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and 
buried their bones under the terebinth 
in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. 

13So Saul died for his transgression 
which he committed against the LORD, 
because of the word of the LORD, 
which he kept not; and also for that he 
asked counsel of a ghost, to inquire 
thereby, 14and inquired not of the 
LORD; therefore He slew him, and 
turned the kingdom unto David the son 
of Jesse. 

 
10 




Then all Israel gathered 
themselves to David unto 
Hebron, saying: ‘Behold, we are thy 
bone and thy flesh. 2In times past, even 
when Saul was king, it was thou that 
didst lead out and bring in Israel; and 
the LORD thy God said unto thee: Thou 
shalt feed My people Israel, and thou 
shalt be prince over My people Israel.’ 
3So all the elders of Israel came to the 
king to Hebron; and David made a 
covenant with them in Hebron before 
the LORD; and they anointed David 
king over Israel, according to the word 
of the LORD by the hand of Samuel. 

4And David and all Israel went to 
Jerusalem—the same is Jebus—and 
the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the 
land, were there. 5And the inhabitants 
of Jebus said to David: ‘Thou shalt not 
come in hither.’ Nevertheless David 
took the stronghold of Zion; the same 
is the city of David. 6And David said: 
‘Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first 
shall be chief and captain.’ And Joab 
the son of Zeruiah went up first, and 
was made chief. 7And David dwelt in 
the stronghold; therefore they called it 
the city of David. 8And he built the 
city round about, from Millo even 
round about; and Joab repaired the rest 
of the city. 9And David waxed greater 
and greater; for the LORD of hosts was 
with him. 

10Now these are the chief of the 
mighty men whom David had, who 
held strongly with him in his kingdom, 
together with all Israel, to make him 
king, according to the word of the 
LORD concerning Israel. 11And this is 
the number of the mighty men whom 
David had: Jashobeam, the son of a 
Hachmonite, the chief of the captains; 
he lifted up his spear against three 
hundred and slew them at one time. 

12And after him was Eleazar the 
son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was 
one of the three mighty men. 13He was 
with David at Pas-dammim, and there 
the Philistines were gathered together 
to battle, where was a plot of ground 
full of barley; and the people fled from 
before the Philistines. 14But they stood 
in the midst of the plot, and defended 
it, and slew the Philistines; and the 
LORD saved them by a great victory. 

15And three of the thirty chiefs 
went down to the rock to David, unto 
the cave of Adullam; and the host of 
the Philistines were encamped in the 
valley of Rephaim. 16And David was 
then in the stronghold, and the garrison 
of the Philistines was then in Beth-
lehem. 17And David longed, and said: 
‘Oh that one would give me water to 
drink of the well of Beth-lehem, which 
is by the gate! ’ 18And the three broke 
through the host of the Philistines, and 
drew water out of the well of Beth-
lehem, that was by the gate, and took 
it, and brought it to David; but David 
would not drink thereof, but poured it 
out unto the LORD, 19and said: ‘My 
God forbid it me, that I should do this; 
shall I drink the blood of these men 
that have put their lives in jeopardy? 
for with the jeopardy of their lives they 
brought it.’ Therefore he would not 
11 




drink it. These things did the three 
mighty men. 

20And aAbishai, the brother of Joab, 
he was chief of the three; for he lifted 
up his spear against three hundred and 
slew them, and had a name among the 
three. 21Of the three in the second rank 
he was the most honourable, and was 
made their captain; howbeit he 
attained not to the first three. 

a Heb. Abshai. 

22Beniah the son of Jehoiada, the 
son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who 
had done mighty deeds, he smote the 
two altar-hearths of Moab; he went 
down also and slew a lion in the midst 
of a pit in time of snow. 23And he slew 
an Egyptian, a man of great stature, 
five cubits high; and in the Egyptian’s 
hand was a spear like a weaver’s 
beam; and he went down to him with a 
staff, and plucked the spear out of the 
Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with 
his own spear. 24These things did 
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had a 
name among the three mighty men. 
25Behold, he was more honourable 
than the thirty, but he attained not to 
the first three; and David set him over 
his guard. 

26Also the mighty men of valour: 
Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan 
the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem; 
27Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the 
Pelonite; 28Ira the son of Ikkesh the 
Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite; 
29Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the 
Ahohite; 30Mahrai the Netophathite, 

Heled the son of Baanah the 
Netophathite; 31Ithai the son of Ribai 
of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, 
Benaiah the Pirathonite; 32Hurai of 
Nahale-gaash, Abiel the Arbathite; 
33Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba 
the Shaalbonite; 34the sons of Hashem 
the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of 
Shageh the Hararite; 35Ahiam the son 
of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son 
of Ur; 36Hepher the Mecherathite, 
Ahijah the Pelonite; 37Hezro the 
Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai; 
38Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar 
the son of Hagri; 39Zelek the 
Ammonite, Nahrai the Berothite, the 
armour-bearer of Joab the son of 
Zeruiah; 40Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the 
Ithrite; 41Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the 
son of Ahlai; 42Adina the son of Shiza 
the Reubenite, a chief of the 
Reubenites, and thirty with him; 
43Hanan the son of Maacah, and 
Joshaphat the Mithnite; 44Uzzia the 
Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons 
of Hotham the Aroerite; 45Jediael the 
son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, 
the Tizite; 46Eliel the Mahavite, and 
Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of 
Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite; 
47Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the 
Mezobaite. 

Now these are they that came 
to David to Ziklag, while he 
was yet shut up because of Saul the 
son of Kish; and they were among the 
mighty men, his helpers in war. 2They 
were armed with bows, and could use 
both the right hand and the left in 
12 




slinging stones and in shooting arrows 
from the bow; they were of Saul’s 
brethren of Benjamin. 3The chief was 
Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of 
Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, 
and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and 
Beracah, and Jehu the Anathothite; 
4and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty 
man among the thirty, and over the 
thirty; 5and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and 
Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite; 
6Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, 
and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the 
Hariphite; 7Elkanah, and Isshiah, and 
Azarel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, 
the Korahites; 8and Joelah, and 
Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of the 
troop. 

9And of the Gadites there separated 
themselves unto David to the 
stronghold in the wilderness, mighty 
men of valour, men trained for war, 
that could handle shield and spear; 
whose faces were like the faces of 
lions, and they were as swift as the 
roes upon the mountains; 10Ezer the 
chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the 
third; 11Mashmannah the fourth, 
Jeremiah the fifth; 12Attai the sixth, 
Eliel the seventh; 13Johanan the eighth, 
Elzabad the ninth; 14Jeremiah the 
tenth, Machbannai the eleventh. 
15These of the sons of Gad were 
captains of the host; he that was least 
was equal to a hundred, and the 
greatest to a thousand. 16These are they 
that went over the Jordan in the first 
month, when it had overflown all its 
banks; and they put to flight all them 
of the valleys, both toward the east, 
and toward the west. 

17And there came of the children of 
Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold 
unto David. 18And David went out to 
meet them, and answered and said 
unto them: ‘If ye be come peaceably 
unto me to help me, my heart shall be 
knit unto you; but if ye be come to 
betray me to mine adversaries, seeing 
there is no wrong in my hands, the 
God of our fathers look thereon, and 
give judgment.’ 19Then the spirit 
clothed Amasai, who was chief of the 
captains: 

Thine are we, David, 

And on thy side, thou son of Jesse; 

Peace, peace be unto thee, 

And peace be to thy helpers; 

For thy God helpeth thee. 

Then David received them, and made 
them captains of the band. 

20Of Manasseh also there fell away 
some to David, when he came with the 
Philistines against Saul to battle, but 
athey helped them not; for the lords of 
the Philistines upon advisement sent 
him away, saying: ‘He will fall away 
to his master Saul to the jeopardy of 
our heads.’ 21As he went to Ziklag, 
there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, 
and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, 
and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zillethai, 
captains of thousands that were of 
Manasseh. 22And they helped David 
against the troop, for they were all 
mighty men of valour, and were 

a That is, David and his men. 


captains in the host. 23For from day to 
day men came to David to help him, 
until there was a great host, like the 
host of God. 

24And these are the numbers of the 
heads of them that were armed for 
war, who came to David to Hebron, to 
turn the kingdom of Saul to him, 
according to the word of the LORD. 
25The children of Judah that bore 
shield and spear were six thousand and 
eight hundred, armed for war. 26Of the 
children of Simeon, mighty men of 
valour for the war, seven thousand and 
one hundred. 27Of the children of Levi 
four thousand and six hundred. 28And 
Jehoiada was the leader of the house of 
Aaron, and with him were three 
thousand and seven hundred; 29and 
Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, 
and of his father’s house twenty and 
two captains. 30And of the children of 
Benjamin, the brethren of Saul, three 
thousand; for hitherto the greatest part 
of them had kept their allegiance to the 
house of Saul. 31And of the children of 
Ephraim twenty thousand and eight 
hundred, mighty men of valour, 
famous men in their fathers’houses. 
32And of the half-tribe of Manasseh 
eighteen thousand, who were 
mentioned by name, to come and make 
David king. 33And of the children of 
Issachar, men that had understanding 
of the times, to know what Israel ought 
to do; the heads of them were two 
hundred; and all their brethren were at 
their commandment. 34Of Zebulun, 
such as were able to go out in the host, 
that could set the battle in array, with 
all manner of instruments of war, fifty 
thousand; and that could order the 
battle array, and were not of double 
heart. 35And of Naphtali a thousand 
captains, and with them with shield 
and spear thirty and seven thousand. 
36And of the Danites that could set the 
battle in array, twenty and eight 
thousand and six hundred. 37And of 
Asher, such as were able to go out in 
the host, that could set the battle in 
array, forty thousand. 38And on the 
other side of the Jordan, of the 
Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the 
half-tribe of Manasseh, with all 
manner of instruments of war for the 
battle, a hundred and twenty thousand. 
39All these, being men of war, that 
could order the battle array, came with 
a whole heart to Hebron, to make 
David king over all Israel; and all the 
rest also of Israel were of one heart to 
make David king. 40And they were 
there with David three days, eating and 
drinking; for their brethren had made 
preparation for them. 41Moreover they 
that were nigh unto them, even as far 
as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, 
brought bread on asses, and on camels, 
and on mules, and on oxen, victual of 
meal, cakes of figs, and clusters of 
raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, 
and sheep in abundance; for there was 
joy in Israel. 

And David consulted with the 
captains of thousands and of 
hundreds, even with every leader. 
2And David said unto all the assembly 
13 




of Israel: ‘If it seem good unto you, 
and if it be of the LORD our God, let us 
send abroad everywhere unto our 
brethren that are left in all the land of 
Israel, and with them to the priests and 
Levites that are in their cities that have 
open land about them, that they may 
gather themselves unto us; 3and let us 
bring back the ark of our God to us; 
for we sought not unto it in the days of 
Saul.’ 4And all the assembly said that 
they would do so; for the thing was 
right in the eyes of all the people. 5So 
David assembled all Israel together, 
from Shihor the brook of Egypt even 
unto the entrance of Hamath, to bring 
the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim. 

6And David went up, and all Israel, 
to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, 
which belonged to Judah, to bring up 
from thence the ark of God, the LORD 
that sitteth upon the cherubim, 
whereon is called the Name. 7And they 
set the ark of God upon a new cart, 
[and brought it] out of the house of 
Abinadab; and Uzza and Ahio drove 
the cart. 8And David and all Israel 
played before God with all their might; 
even with songs, and with harps, and 
with psalteries, and with timbrels, and 
with cymbals, and with trumpets. 9And 
when they came unto the threshing-
floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his 
hand to hold the ark; for the oxen 
stumbled. 10And the anger of the LORD 
was kindled against Uzza, and He 
smote him, because he put forth his 
hand to the ark; and there he died 
before God. 11And David was 
displeased, because the LORD had 
broken forth upon Uzza; and that place 
was called aPerez-uzza unto this day. 
12And David was afraid of God that 
day, saying: ‘How shall I bring the ark 
of God home to me?’ 13So David 
removed not the ark unto him into the 
city of David, but carried it aside into 
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 
14And the ark of God remained with 
the family of Obed-edom in his house 
three months; and the LORD blessed the 
house of Obed-edom, and all that he 
had. 

a That is, The breach of Uzza. 

14 



And Huram king of Tyre sent 
messengers to David, and 
cedar-trees, and masons, and 
carpenters, to build him a house. 2And 
David perceived that the LORD had 
established him king over Israel, for 
his kingdom was exalted exceedingly, 
for His people Israel’s sake. 

3And David took more wives at 
Jerusalem; and David begot more sons 
and daughters. 4And these are the 
names of the children whom he had in 
Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, 
Nathan, and Solomon; 5and Ibhar, and 
Elishua, and Elpelet; 6and Nogah, and 
Nepheg, and Japhia; 7and Elishama, 
and Beeliada, and Eliphelet. 

8And when the Philistines heard 
that David was anointed king over all 
Israel, all the Philistines went up to 
seek David; and David heard of it, and 
went out to meet them. 9Now the 
Philistines had come and made a raid 


in the valley of Rephaim. 10And David 
inquired of God, saying: ‘Shall I go up 
against the Philistines? and wilt Thou 
deliver them into my hand?’ And the 
LORD said unto him: ‘Go up; for I will 
deliver them into thy hand.’ 11So they 
came up to Baal-perazim, and David 
smote them there; and David said: 
‘God hath broken mine enemies by my 
hand, like the breach of waters.’ 
Therefore they called the name of that 
place aBaal-perazim. 12And they left 
their gods there; and David gave 
commandment, and they were burned 
with fire. 

a That is, The possessor of breaches. 

13And the Philistines yet again 
made a raid in the valley. 14And David 
inquired again of God; and God said 
unto him: ‘Thou shalt not go up after 
them; turn away from them, and come 
upon them over against the mulberry-
trees. 15And it shall be, when thou 
hearest the sound of marching in the 
tops of the mulberry-trees, that then 
thou shalt go out to battle; for God is 
gone out before thee to smite the host 
of the Philistines.’ 16And David did as 
God commanded him; and they smote 
the host of the Philistines from Gibeon 
even to Gezer. 17And the fame of 
David went out into all lands; and the 
LORD brought the fear of him upon all 
nations. 

And [David] made him houses 
in the city of David; and he 
prepared a place for the ark of God, 
and pitched for it a tent. 2Then David 

said: ‘None ought to carry the ark of 
God but the Levites; for them hath the 
LORD chosen to carry the ark of the 
LORD, and to minister unto Him for 
ever.’ 3And David assembled all Israel 
at Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the 
LORD unto its place, which he had 
prepared for it. 4And David gathered 
together the sons of Aaron, and the 
Levites; 5of the sons of Kohath: Uriel 
the chief, and his brethren a hundred 
and twenty; 6of the sons of Merari: 
Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two 
hundred and twenty; 7of the sons of 
Gershom: Joel the chief, and his 
brethren a hundred and thirty; 8of the 
sons of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the chief, 
and his brethren two hundred; 9of the 
sons of Hebron: Eliel the chief, and his 
brethren fourscore; 10of the sons of 
Uzziel: Amminadab the chief, and his 
brethren a hundred and twelve. 11And 
David called for Zadok and Abiathar 
the priests, and for the Levites, for 
Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and 
Eliel, and Amminadab, 12and said unto 
them: ‘Ye are the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the Levites; sanctify 
yourselves, both ye and your brethren, 
that ye may bring up the ark of the 
LORD, the God of Israel, unto the place 
that I have prepared for it. 13For 
because ye [bore it] not at the first, the 
LORD our God made a breach upon us, 
for that we sought Him not according 
to the ordinance.’ 14So the priests and 
the Levites sanctified themselves to 
bring up the ark of the LORD, the God 
of Israel. 15And the children of the 
15 




Levites bore the ark of God upon their 
shoulders with the bars thereon, as 
Moses commanded according to the 
word of the LORD. 

16And David spoke to the chief of 
the Levites to appoint their brethren 
the singers, with instruments of music, 
psalteries and harps and cymbals, 
sounding aloud and lifting up the voice 
with joy. 17So the Levites appointed 
Heman the son of Joel; and of his 
brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; 
and of the sons of Merari their 
brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; 
18and with them their brethren of the 
second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and 
Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, 
and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and 
Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and 
Eliphalehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-
edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers. 19So 
the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan 
[, were appointed], with cymbals of 
brass to sound aloud; 20and Zechariah, 
and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and 
Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and 
Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries 
set to Alamoth; 21and Mattithiah, and 
Eliphalehu, and Mikneiahu, and Obed-
edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with 
harps on the Sheminith, to lead. 22And 
Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was 
over the song; he was master in the 
song, because he was skilful. 23And 
Berechiah and Elkanah were door-
keepers for the ark. 24And Shebaniah, 
and Joshaphat, and Nethanel, and 
Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, 
and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with 
the trumpets before the ark of God; 
and Obed-edom and Jehiah were 
doorkeepers for the ark. 

25So David, and the elders of Israel, 
and the captains over thousands, went 
to bring up the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD out of the house of Obed-
edom with joy. 26And it came to pass, 
when God helped the Levites that bore 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD, 
that they sacrificed seven bullocks and 
seven rams. 27And David was clothed 
with a robe of fine linen, and all the 
Levites that bore the ark, and the 
singers, and Chenaniah the master of 
the singers in the song; and David had 
upon him an ephod of linen. 28Thus all 
Israel brought up the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD with shouting, 
and with sound of the horn, and with 
trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding 
aloud with psalteries and harps. 29And 
it came to pass, as the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD came to the city 
of David, that Michal the daughter of 
Saul looked out at the window, and 
saw king David dancing and making 
merry; and she despised him in her 
heart. 

And they brought in the ark of 
God, and set it in the midst of 
the tent that David had pitched for it, 
and they offered burnt-offerings and 
peace-offerings before God. 2And 
when David had made an end of 
offering the burnt-offering and the 
peace-offerings, he blessed the people 
in the name of the LORD. 3And he dealt 
to every one of Israel, both man and 
16 




woman, to every one a loaf of bread, 
and a cake made in a pan, and a sweet 
cake. 

4And he appointed certain of the 
Levites to minister before the ark of 
the LORD, and to celebrate and to thank 
and praise the LORD, the God of Israel: 
5Asaph the chief, and second to him 
Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, 
and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, 
and Benaiah, and Obed-edom, and 
Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps; 
and Asaph with cymbals, sounding 
aloud; 6and Benaiah and Jahaziel the 
priests with trumpets continually, 
before the ark of the covenant of God. 

7Then on that day did David first 
ordain to give thanks unto the LORD, by 
the hand of Asaph and his brethren. 

8O give thanks unto the LORD, call 
upon His name; 

Make known His doings among the 
peoples. 

9Sing unto Him, sing praises unto 
Him; 

Speak ye of all His marvellous 
works. 

10Glory ye in His holy name; 

Let the heart of them rejoice that 
seek the LORD. 

11Seek ye the LORD and His strength; 

Seek His face continually. 

12Remember His marvellous works 
that He hath done, 

His wonders, and the judgments of 
His mouth; 

13O ye seed of Israel His servant, 

Ye children of Jacob, His chosen 
ones. 

14He is the LORD our God; 

His judgments are in all the earth. 

15Remember His covenant for ever, 

The word which He commanded to 
a thousand generations; 

16[The covenant] which He made 
with Abraham, 

And His oath unto Isaac; 

17And He established it unto Jacob 
for a statute, 

To Israel for an everlasting 
covenant; 

18Saying: ‘Unto thee will I give the 
land of Canaan, 

The lot of your inheritance.’ 

 

19When ye were but a few men in 
number, 

Yea, very few, and sojourners in it, 

20And when they went about from 
nation to nation, 

And from one kingdom to another 
people, 

21He suffered no man to do them 
wrong, 

Yea, for their sake He reproved 
kings: 

22’Touch not Mine anointed ones, 

And do My prophets no harm.’ 

 

23Sing unto the LORD, all the earth; 

Proclaim His salvation from day to 
day. 

24Declare His glory among the 
nations, 

His marvellous works among all the 
peoples. 

25For great is the LORD, and highly to 
be praised; 


He also is to be feared above all 
gods. 

26For all the gods of the peoples are 
things of nought; 

But the LORD made the heavens. 

27Honour and majesty are before 
Him; 

Strength and gladness are in His 
place. 

28Ascribe unto the LORD, ye kindreds 
of the peoples, 

Ascribe unto the LORD glory and 
strength. 

29Ascribe unto the LORD the glory 
due unto His name; 

Bring an offering, and come before 
Him; 

Worship the LORD in the beauty of 
holiness. 

30Tremble before Him, all the earth; 

The world also is established that it 
cannot be moved. 

31Let the heavens be glad, and let 
the earth rejoice; 

And let them say among the nations: 
‘The LORD reigneth.’ 

32Let the sea roar, and the fulness 
thereof; 

Let the field exult, and all that is 
therein; 

33Then shall the trees of the wood 
sing for joy, 

Before the LORD, for He is come to 
judge the earth. 

 

34O give thanks unto the LORD; for 
He is good; 

For His mercy endureth for ever. 

35And say ye: ‘Save us, O God of 
our salvation, 

And gather us together and deliver 
us from the nations, 

That we may give thanks unto Thy 
holy name, 

That we may triumph in Thy 
praise.’ 

36Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, 

From everlasting even to 
everlasting. 

And all the people said: ‘Amen, ‘and 
praised the LORD. 

37So he left there, before the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, Asaph and his 
brethren, to minister before the ark 
continually, as every day’s work 
required; 38and Obed-edom with their 
brethren, threescore and eight; Obed-
edom also the son of Jedithun and 
Hosah to be door-keepers; 39and Zadok 
the priest, and his brethren the priests, 
before the tabernacle of the LORD in 
the high place that was at Gibeon, 40to 
offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD 
upon the altar of burnt-offering 
continually morning and evening, even 
according to all that is written in the 
Law of the LORD, which He 
commanded unto Israel; 41and with 
them Heman and Jeduthun, and the 
rest that were chosen, who were 
mentioned by name, to give thanks to 
the LORD, because His mercy endureth 
for ever; 42and with them Heman and 
Jeduthun, to sound aloud with 
trumpets and cymbals, and with 
instruments for the songs of God; and 


the sons of Jeduthun to be at the gate. 
43And all the people departed every 
man to his house; and David returned 
to bless his house. 

And it came to pass, when 
David dwelt in his house, that 
David said to Nathan the prophet: ‘Lo, 
I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark 
of the covenant of the LORD dwelleth 
under curtains.’ 2And Nathan said unto 
David: ‘Do all that is in thy heart; for 
God is with thee.’ 3And it came to pass 
the same night, that the word of God 
came to Nathan, saying: 4’Go and tell 
David My servant: Thus saith the 
LORD: Thou shalt not build Me a house 
to dwell in; 5for I have not dwelt in a 
house since the day that I brought up 
Israel, unto this day; but have [gone] 
from tent to tent, and from one 
tabernacle [to another[. 6In all places 
wherein I have walked among all 
Israel, spoke I a word with any of the 
judges of Israel, whom I commanded 
to feed My people, saying: Why have 
ye not built Me a house of cedar? 
7Now therefore thus shalt thou say 
unto My servant David: Thus saith the 
LORD of hosts: I took thee from the 
sheepcote, from following the sheep, 
that thou shouldest be prince over My 
people Israel; 8and I have been with 
thee whithersoever thou wentest, and 
have cut off all thine enemies from 
before thee; and I will make thee a 
name, like unto the name of the great 
ones that are in the earth. 9And I will 
appoint a place for My people Israel, 
and will plant them, that they may 
dwell in their own place, and be 
disquieted no more; neither shall the 
children of wickedness waste them any 
more, as at the first, 10even from the 
day that I commanded judges to be 
over My people Israel; and I will 
subdue all thine enemies. Moreover I 
tell thee that the LORD will build thee a 
house. 11And it shall come to pass, 
when thy days are fulfilled that thou 
must go to be with thy fathers, that I 
will set up thy seed after thee, who 
shall be of thy sons; and I will 
establish his kingdom. 12He shall build 
Me a house, and I will establish his 
throne for ever. 13I will be to him for a 
father, and he shall be to Me for a son; 
and I will not take My mercy away 
from him, as I took it from him that 
was before thee; 14but I will settle him 
in My house and in My kingdom for 
ever; and his throne shall be 
established for ever.’ 15According to 
all these words, and according to all 
this vision, so did Nathan speak unto 
David. 

16Then David the king went in, and 
sat before the LORD; and he said: ‘Who 
am I, O LORD God, and what is my 
house, that Thou hast brought me thus 
far? 17And this was a small thing in 
Thine eyes, O God; but Thou hast 
spoken of Thy servant’s house for a 
great while to come, and hast regarded 
me after the manner of a man of high 
degree, O LORD God. 18What can 
David say yet more unto Thee 
concerning the honour which is done 
to Thy servant? for Thou knowest Thy 
17 




servant. 19O LORD, for Thy servant’s 
sake, and according to Thine own 
heart, hast Thou wrought all this 
greatness, to make known all these 
great things. 20O LORD, there is none 
like Thee, neither is there any God 
beside Thee, according to all that we 
have heard with our ears. 21And who is 
like Thy people Israel, a nation one in 
the earth, whom God went to redeem 
unto Himself for a people, to make 
Thee a name by great and tremendous 
things, in driving out nations from 
before Thy people, whom Thou didst 
redeem out of Egypt. 22For Thy people 
Israel didst Thou make Thine own 
people for ever; and Thou, LORD, 
becamest their God. 23And now, O 
LORD, let the word that Thou hast 
spoken concerning Thy servant, and 
concerning his house, be established 
for ever, and do as Thou hast spoken. 
24Yea, let it be established, and let Thy 
name be magnified for ever, that it 
may be said: The LORD of hosts is the 
God of Israel, even a God to Israel; 
and the house of David Thy servant 
shall be established before Thee. 25For 
Thou, O my God, hast revealed to Thy 
servant that Thou wilt build him a 
house; therefore hath Thy servant 
taken heart to pray before Thee. 26And 
now, O LORD, Thou alone art God, and 
hast promised this good thing unto 
Thy servant; 27and now it hath pleased 
Thee to bless the house of Thy servant, 
that it may continue for ever before 
Thee; for Thou, O LORD, hast blessed, 
and so let [Thy servant] be blessed for 
ever.’ 

And after this it came to pass, 
that David smote the 
Philistines, and subdued them, and 
took Gath and its towns out of the 
hand of the Philistines. 

2And he smote Moab; and the 
Moabites became servants to David, 
and brought presents. 

3And David smote Hadarezer king 
of Zobah by Hamath, as he went to 
establish his dominion at the river 
Euphrates. 4And David took from him 
a thousand chariots, and seven 
thousand horsemen, and twenty 
thousand footmen; and David houghed 
all the chariot horses, but reserved of 
them for a hundred chariots. 5And 
when the Arameans of Damascus 
came to succour Hadarezer king of 
Zobah, David smote of the Arameans 
two and twenty thousand men. 6Then 
David put [garrisons] in Aram 
Damascus; and the Arameans became 
servants to David, and brought 
presents. And the LORD gave victory to 
David whithersoever he went. 7And 
David took the shields of gold that 
were on the servants of Hadarezer, and 
brought them to Jerusalem. 8And from 
Tibhath and from Cun, cities of 
Hadarezer, David took very much 
brass, wherewith Solomon made the 
brazen sea, and the pillars, and the 
vessels of brass. 

9And when Tou king of Hamath 
heard that David had smitten all the 
host of Hadarezer king of Zobah, 10he 
18 




sent Hadoram his son to king David, to 
salute him, and to bless him—because 
he had fought against Hadarezer and 
smitten him; for Hadarezer had wars 
with Tou—and [he had with him] all 
manner of vessels of gold and silver 
and brass. 11These also did king David 
dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver 
and the gold that he carried away from 
all the nations; from Edom, and from 
Moab, and from the children of 
Ammon, and from the Philistines, and 
from Amalek. 12Moreover aAbishai the 
son of Zeruiah smote of the Edomites 
in the Valley of Salt eighteen 
thousand. 13And he put garrisons in 
Edom; and all the Edomites became 
servants to David. And the LORD gave 
victory to David whithersoever he 
went. 

a Heb. Abshai, and in xix. 11, 15. 

14And David reigned over all Israel; 
and he executed justice and 
righteousness unto all his people. 
15And Joab the son of Zeruiah was 
over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son 
of Ahilud was recorder. 16And Zadok 
the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the 
son of Abiathar, were priests; and 
Shavsha was scribe; 17and Beniah the 
son of Jehoiada was over the 
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the 
sons of David were chief about the 
king. 

And it came to pass after this, 
that Nahash the king of the 
children of Ammon died, and his son 
reigned in his stead. 2And David said: 

‘l will show kindness unto Hanun the 
son of Nahash, because his father 
showed kindness to me.’ So David 
sent messengers to comfort him 
concerning his father. And David’s 
servants came into the land of the 
children of Ammon to Hanun, to 
comfort him. 3But the princes of the 
children of Ammon said to Hanun: 
‘Thinkest thou that David doth honour 
thy father, that he hath sent comforters 
unto thee? are not his servants come 
unto thee to search, and to overthrow, 
and to spy out the land?’ 4So Hanun 
took David’s servants, and shaved 
them, and cut off their garments in the 
middle, even to their hips, and sent 
them away. 5Then there went certain 
persons, and told David how the men 
were served. And he sent to meet 
them; for the men were greatly 
ashamed. And the king said: ‘Tarry at 
Jericho until your beards be grown, 
and then return.’ 

6And when the children of Ammon 
saw that they had made themselves 
odious to David, Hanun and the 
children of Ammon sent a thousand 
talents of silver to hire them chariots 
and horsemen out of Aram-naharaim, 
and out of Aram-maacah, and out of 
Zobah. 7So they hired them thirty and 
two thousand chariots, and the king of 
Maacah and his people; who came and 
encamped before Medeba. And the 
children of Ammon gathered 
themselves together from their cities, 
and came to battle. 8And when David 
heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the 
19 




host of the mighty men. 9And the 
children of Ammon came out and put 
the battle in array at the gate of the 
city; and the kings that were come 
were by themselves in the field. 

10Now when Joab saw that the 
battle was set against him before and 
behind, he chose of all the choice men 
of Israel, and put them in array against 
the Arameans. 11And the rest of the 
people he committed into the hand of 
Abishai his brother, and they put 
themselves in array against the 
children of Ammon. 12And he said: ‘If 
the Arameans be too strong for me, 
then thou shalt help me; but if the 
children of Ammon be too strong for 
thee, then I will help thee. 13Be of 
good courage, and let us prove strong 
for our people, and for the cities of our 
God; and the LORD do that which 
seemeth Him good.’ 14So Joab and the 
people that were with him drew nigh 
unto the battle to meet the Arameans; 
and they fled before him. 15And when 
the children of Ammon saw that the 
Arameans were fled, they likewise fled 
before Abishai his brother, and entered 
into the city. Then Joab came to 
Jerusalem. 

16And when the Arameans saw that 
they were put to the worse before 
Israel, they sent messengers, and 
brought out the Arameans that were 
beyond the River, with Shophach the 
captain of the host of Hadarezer at 
their head. 17And it was told David; 
and he gathered all Israel together, and 
passed over the Jordan, and came upon 
them, and set the battle in array against 
them. So when David had put the 
battle in array against the Arameans, 
they fought with him. 18And the 
Arameans fled before Israel; and 
David slew of the Arameans the men 
of seven thousand chariots, and forty 
thousand footmen, and killed 
Shophach the captain of the host. 
19And when the servants of Hadarezer 
saw that they were put to the worse 
before Israel, they made peace with 
David, and served him; neither would 
the Arameans help the children of 
Ammon any more. 

And it came to pass, at the 
time of the return of the year, 
at the time when kings go out to battle, 
that Joab led forth the power of the 
army, and wasted the country of the 
children of Ammon, and came and 
besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at 
Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, 
and overthrew it. 2And David took the 
crown of Malcam from off his head, 
and found it to weigh a talent of gold, 
and there were precious stones in it; 
and it was set upon David’s head; and 
he brought forth the spoil of the city, 
exceeding much. 3And he brought 
forth the people that were therein, and 
cut them with saws, and with harrows 
of iron, and with axes. And thus did 
David unto all the cities of the children 
of Ammon. And David and all the 
people returned to Jerusalem. 

4And it came to pass after this, that 
there arose war at Gezer with the 
Philistines; then Sibbecai the 
20 




Hushathite slew Sippai, of the sons of 
the giants; and they were subdued. 
5And there was again war with the 
Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair 
slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the 
Gittite, the staff of whose spear was 
like a weaver’s beam. 6And there was 
again war at Gath, where was a man of 
great stature, whose fingers and toes 
were four and twenty, six [on each 
hand], and six [on each foot]; and he 
also was born unto the giant. 7And 
when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the 
son of Shimea David’s brother slew 
him. 8These were born unto the giant 
in Gath; and they fell by the hand of 
David and by the hand of his servants. 

And Satan stood up against 
Israel, and moved David to 
number Israel. 2And David said to 
Joab and to the princes of the people: 
‘Go, number Israel from Beersheba 
even to Dan; and bring me word, that I 
may know the sum of them.’ 3And 
Joab said: ‘The LORD make His people 
a hundred times so many more as they 
are; but, my lord the king, are they not 
all my lord’s servants? why doth my 
lord require this thing? why will he be 
a cause of guilt unto Israel?’ 
4Nevertheless the king’s word 
prevailed against Joab. Wherefore 
Joab departed and went throughout all 
Israel, and came to Jerusalem. 5And 
Joab gave up the sum of the 
numbering of the people unto David. 
And all they of Israel were a thousand 
thousand and a hundred thousand men 
that drew sword; and Judah was four 
hundred three-score and ten thousand 
men that drew sword. 6But Levi and 
Benjamin he did not number among 
them; for the king’s word was 
abominable to Joab. 

7And God was displeased with this 
thing; therefore He smote Israel. 8And 
David said unto God: ‘I have sinned 
greatly, in that I have done this thing; 
but now, put away, I beseech Thee, the 
iniquity of Thy servant; for I have 
done very foolishly.’ 9And the LORD 
spoke unto Gad, David’s seer, saying: 
10’Go and speak unto David, saying: 
Thus saith the LORD: I offer thee three 
things; choose thee one of them, that I 
may do it unto thee.’ 11So Gad came to 
David, and said unto him: ‘Thus saith 
the LORD: Take which thou wilt: 
12either three years of famine; or three 
months to be swept away before thy 
foes, while the sword of thine enemies 
overtaketh thee; or else three days the 
sword of the LORD, even pestilence in 
the land, and the angel of the LORD 
destroying throughout all the borders 
of Israel. Now therefore consider what 
answer I shall return to Him that sent 
me.’ 13And David said unto Gad: ‘I am 
in a great strait; let me fall now into 
the hand of the LORD, for very great are 
His mercies; and let me not fall into 
the hand of man.’ 

14So the LORD sent a pestilence 
upon Israel; and there fell of Israel 
seventy thousand men. 15And God sent 
an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it; 
and as he was about to destroy, the 
LORD beheld, and He repented Him of 
21 




the evil, and said to the destroying 
angel: ‘It is enough; now stay thy 
hand.’ And the angel of the LORD was 
standing by the threshing-floor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 16And David lifted 
up his eyes, and saw the angel of the 
LORD standing between the earth and 
the heaven, having a drawn sword in 
his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. 
Then David and the elders, clothed in 
sackcloth, fell upon their faces. 17And 
David said unto God: ‘Is it not I that 
commanded the people to be 
numbered? even I it is that have sinned 
and done very wickedly; but these 
sheep, what have they done? let Thy 
hand, I pray Thee, O LORD my God, be 
against me, and against my father’s 
house; but not against Thy people, that 
they should be plagued.’ 

18Then the angel of the LORD 
commanded Gad to say to David, that 
David should go up, and rear an altar 
unto the LORD in the threshing-floor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 19And David went 
up at the saying of Gad, which he 
spoke in the name of the LORD. 20And 
Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; 
and his four sons that were with him 
hid themselves. Now Ornan was 
threshing wheat. 21And as David came 
to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw 
David, and went out of the threshing-
floor, and bowed down to David with 
his face to the ground. 22Then David 
said to Ornan: ‘Give me the place of 
this threshing-floor, that I may build 
thereon an altar unto the LORD; for the 
full price shalt thou give it me; that the 
plague may be stayed from the 
people.’ 23And Ornan said unto David: 
‘Take it to thee, and let my lord the 
king do that which is good in his eyes; 
lo, I give thee the oxen for burnt-
offerings, and the threshing-
instruments for wood, and the wheat 
for the meal-offering; I give it 
all’24And king David said to Ornan: 
‘Nay, but I will verily buy it for the 
full price; for I will not take that which 
is thine for the LORD, nor offer a burnt-
offering without cost.’ 25So David 
gave to Ornan for the place six 
hundred shekels of gold by weight. 
26And David built there an altar unto 
the LORD, and offered burnt-offerings 
and peace-offerings, and called upon 
the LORD; and He answered him from 
heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt-
offering. 27And the LORD commanded 
the angel; and he put up his sword 
back into the sheath thereof. 

28At that time, when David saw that 
the LORD had answered him in the 
threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, 
then he sacrificed there. 29For the 
tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses 
made in the wilderness, and the altar 
of burnt-offering, were at that time in 
the high place at Gibeon. 30But David 
could not go before it to inquire of 
God; for he was terrified because of 
the sword of the angel of the LORD. 

Then David said: ‘This is the 
house of the LORD God, and 
this is the altar of burnt-offering for 
Israel.’ 
22 




2And David commanded to gather 
together the strangers that were in the 
land of Israel; and he set masons to 
hew wrought stones to build the house 
of God. 3And David prepared iron in 
abundance for the nails for the doors 
of the gates, and for the couplings; and 
brass in abundance without weight; 
4and cedar-trees without number; for 
the Zidonians and they of Tyre 
brought cedar-trees in abundance to 
David. 5And David said: ‘Solomon my 
son is young and tender, and the house 
that is to be builded for the LORD must 
be exceeding magnificent, of fame and 
of glory throughout all countries; I will 
therefore make preparation for him.’ 
So David prepared abundantly before 
his death. 

6Then He called for Solomon his 
son, and charged him to build a house 
for the LORD, the God of Israel. 7And 
David said to Solomon: ‘My son, as 
for me, it was in my heart to build a 
house unto the name of the LORD my 
God. 8But the word of the LORD came 
to me, saying: Thou hast shed blood 
abundantly, and hast made great wars; 
thou shalt not build a house unto My 
name, because thou hast shed much 
blood upon the earth in My sight. 
9Behold, a son shall be born to thee, 
who shall be a man of rest; and I will 
give him rest from all his enemies 
round about; for his name shall be 
aSolomon, and I will give peace and 
quietness unto Israel in his days. 10He 

a That is, Peaceful. 

shall build a house for My name; and 
he shall be to Me for a son, and I will 
be to him for a father; and I will 
establish the throne of his kingdom 
over Israel for ever. 11Now, my son, 
the LORD be with thee; and prosper 
thou, and build the house of the LORD 
thy God, as He hath spoken 
concerning thee. 12Only the LORD give 
thee discretion and understanding, and 
give thee charge concerning Israel; 
that so thou mayest keep the law of the 
LORD thy God. 13Then shalt thou 
prosper, if thou observe to do the 
statutes and the ordinances which the 
LORD charged Moses with concerning 
Israel; be strong, and of good courage; 
fear not, neither be dismayed. 14Now, 
behold, in my straits I have prepared 
for the house of the LORD a hundred 
thousand talents of gold, and a 
thousand thousand talents of silver; 
and of brass and iron without weight, 
for it is in abundance; timber also and 
stone have I prepared; and thou mayest 
add thereto. 15Moreover there are 
workmen with thee in abundance, 
hewers and workers of stone and 
timber, and all men that are skilful in 
any manner of work; 16of the gold, the 
silver, and the brass, and the iron, 
there is no number. Arise and be 
doing, and the LORD be with thee.’ 

17David also commanded all the 
princes of Israel to help Solomon his 
son: 18’Is not the LORD your God with 
you? and hath He not given you rest 
on every side? for He hath delivered 
the inhabitants of the land into my 


hand; and the land is subdued before 
the LORD, and before His people. 
19Now set your heart and your soul to 
seek after the LORD your God; arise 
therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of 
the LORD God, to bring the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, and the holy 
vessels of God, into the house that is to 
be built to the name of the LORD.’ 

Now David was old and full of 
days; and he made Solomon 
his son king over Israel. 2And he 
gathered together all the princes of 
Israel, with the priests and the Levites. 
3And the Levites were numbered from 
thirty years old and upward; and their 
number by their polls, man by man, 
was thirty and eight thousand. 4Of 
these, twenty and four thousand were 
to oversee the work of the house of the 
LORD; and six thousand were officers 
and judges; 5and four thousand were 
doorkeepers; and four thousand 
praised the LORD ‘with the instruments 
which I made to praise therewith.’ 

6And David divided them into 
courses according to the sons of Levi: 
Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 7Of the 
Gershonites: Ladan, and Shimei. 8The 
sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, and 
Zetham, and Joel, three. 9The sons of 
Shimei: Shelomith, and Haziel, and 
Haran, three. These were the heads of 
the fathers’houses of Ladan. 10And the 
sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, and 
Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the 
sons of Shimei. 11And Jahath was the 
chief, and Zizah the second; but Jeush 
and Beriah had not many sons; 
therefore they became a fathers’house 
in one reckoning. 

12The sons of Kohath: Amram, 
Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four. 13The 
sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; 
and Aaron was separated, that he 
should be sanctified as most holy, he 
and his sons for ever, to offer before 
the LORD, to minister unto Him, and to 
bless in His name for ever. 14But as for 
Moses the man of God, his sons are 
named among the tribe of Levi. 15The 
sons of Moses: Gershom, and Eliezer. 
16The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the 
chief. 17And the sons of Eliezer were: 
Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had 
no other sons; but the sons of 
Rehabiah were very many. 18The sons 
of Izhar: Shelomith the chief. 19The 
sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, 
Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, 
and Jekameam the fourth. 20The sons 
of Uzziel: Micah the chief, and Isshiah 
the second. 

21The sons of Merari: Mahli, and 
Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar, 
and Kish. 22And Eleazar died, and had 
no sons, but daughters only; and their 
brethren the sons of Kish took them to 
wife. 23The sons of Mushi: Mahli, and 
Eder, and Jeremoth, three. 

24These were the sons of Levi after 
their fathers’houses, even the heads of 
the fathers’houses, according to their 
muster, in the number of names by 
their polls, who did the work for the 
service of the house of the LORD, from 
twenty years old and upward. 25For 
David said: ‘The LORD, the God of 
23 




Israel, hath given rest unto His people, 
and He dwelleth in Jerusalem for ever; 
26and also the Levites shall no more 
have need to carry the tabernacle and 
all the vessels of it for the service 
thereof.’ 27For by the last ordinances 
of David the sons of Levi were 
numbered from twenty years old and 
upward. 28For their station was at the 
side of the sons of Aaron for the 
service of the house of the LORD, in the 
courts, and in the chambers, and in the 
purifying of all holy things, even the 
work of the service of the house of 
God; 29for the showbread also, and for 
the fine flour for a meal-offering, 
whether of unleavened wafers, or of 
that which is baked on the griddle, or 
of that which is soaked, and for all 
manner of measure and size; 30and to 
stand every morning to thank and 
praise the LORD, and likewise at even; 
31and to offer all burnt-offerings unto 
the LORD, on the sabbaths, on the new 
moons, and in the appointed seasons, 
in number according to the ordinance 
concerning them, continually, before 
the LORD; 32and that they should keep 
the charge of the tent of meeting, and 
the charge of the holy place, and the 
charge of the sons of Aaron their 
brethren, for the service of the house 
of the LORD. 

And the courses of the sons of 
Aaron were these. The sons of 
Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and 
Ithamar. 2But Nadab and Abihu died 
before their father, and had no 
children; therefore Eleazar and 
Ithamar executed the priest’s office. 
3And David with Zadok of the sons of 
Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of 
Ithamar, divided them according to 
their ordering in their service. 4And 
there were more chief men found of 
the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of 
Ithamar; and thus were they divided: 
of the sons of Eleazar there were 
sixteen, heads of fathers’houses; and 
of the sons of Ithamar, according to 
their fathers’houses, eight. 5Thus were 
they divided by lot, one sort with 
another; for they were princes of the 
sanctuary and princes of God, both of 
the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of 
Ithamar. 6And Shemaiah the son of 
Nethanel the scribe, who was of the 
Levites, wrote them in the presence of 
the king, and the princes, and Zadok 
the priest, and Ahimelech the son of 
Abiathar, and the heads of the 
fathers’houses of the priests and of the 
Levites: one father’s house being taken 
for Eleazar, and proportionately for 
Ithamar. 

7Now the first lot came forth to 
Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah; 8the 
third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim; 
9the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to 
Mijamin; 10the seventh to Hakkoz, the 
eighth to Abijah; 11the ninth to Jeshua, 
the tenth to Shecaniah; 12the eleventh 
to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim; 13the 
thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to 
Jeshebeab; 14the fifteenth to Bilgah, 
the sixteenth to Immer; 15the 
seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to 
Happizzez; 16the nineteenth to 
24 




Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel; 
17the one and twentieth to Jachin, the 
two and twentieth to Gamul; 18the 
three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four 
and twentieth to Maaziah. 19These 
were the orderings of them in their 
service, to come into the house of the 
LORD according to the ordinance given 
unto them by the hand of Aaron their 
father, as the LORD, the God of Israel, 
had commanded him. 

20And of the rest of the sons of 
Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; 
of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah. 21Of 
Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, 
Isshiah the chief. 22Of the Izharites, 
Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, 
Jahath. 23And Benai, Jeriah, Amariah 
the second, Jahaziel the third, 
Jekameam the fourth. 24The sons of 
Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, 
Shamir. 25The brother of Micah, 
Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, 
Zechariah. 26The sons of Merari: Mahli 
and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah, his 
son, 27even the sons of Merari through 
Jaaziah his son: Shoham, and Zaccur, 
and Ibri. 28Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had 
no sons. 29Of Kish: the sons of Kish, 
Jerahmeel. 30And the sons of Mushi: 
Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These 
were the sons of the Levites after their 
fathers’houses. 31These likewise cast 
lots even as their brethren the sons of 
Aaron in the presence of David the 
king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and 
the heads of the fathers’houses of the 
priests and of the Levites; the 
fathers’houses of the chief even as 
those of his younger brother. 

Moreover David and the 
captains of the host separated 
for the service certain of the sons of 
Asaph, and of Heman, and of 
Jeduthun, who should prophesy with 
harps, with psalteries, and with 
cymbals; and the number of them that 
did the work according to their service 
was: 2of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, 
and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and 
Asarelah, the sons of Asaph; under the 
hand of Asaph, who prophesied 
according to the direction of the king. 
3Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun: 
Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, 
Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six; under 
the hands of their father Jeduthun with 
the harp, who prophesied in giving 
thanks and praising the LORD. 4Of 
Heman: the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, 
Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and 
Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, 
Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer, 
Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, 
Mahazioth; 5all these were the sons of 
Heman the king’s seer in the things 
pertaining to God, to lift up the horn. 
And God gave to Heman fourteen sons 
and three daughters. 6All these were 
under the hands of their fathers for 
song in the house of the LORD, with 
cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the 
service of the house of God, according 
to the direction of the king—Asaph, 
Jeduthun, and Heman. 7And the 
number of them, with their brethren 
that were instructed in singing unto the 
25 




LORD, even all that were skilful, was 
two hundred fourscore and eight. 8And 
they cast lots ward against [ward], as 
well the small as the great, the teacher 
as the scholar. 

9Now the first lot came forth for 
Asaph to Joseph; 

The second to Gedaliah; he and his 
brethren and sons were twelve; 

10The third to Zaccur, his sons and 
his brethren, twelve; 

11The fourth to Izri, his sons and his 
brethren, twelve; 

12The fifth to Nethaniah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

13The sixth to Bukkiah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

14The seventh to Jesarelah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

15The eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

16The ninth to Mattaniah, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

17The tenth to Shimei, his sons and 
his brethren, twelve; 

18The eleventh to Azarel, his sons 
and his brethren, twelve; 

19The twelfth to Hashabiah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

20For the thirteenth, Shubael, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

21For the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

22For the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

23For the sixteenth to Hananiah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

24For the seventeenth to 
Joshbekashah, his sons and his 
brethren, twelve; 

25For the eighteenth to Hanani, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 2 

6For the nineteenth to Mallothi, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

27For the twentieth to Eliathah, his 
sons and his brethren, twelve; 

28For the one and twentieth to 
Hothir, his sons and his brethren, 
twelve; 

29For the two and twentieth to 
Giddalti, his sons and his brethren, 
twelve; 

30For the three and twentieth to 
Mahazioth, his sons and his brethren, 
twelve; 

31For the four and twentieth to 
Romamti-ezer, his sons and his 
brethren, twelve. 

 

For the courses of the 
doorkeepers: of the Korahites: 
Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the 
sons of Asaph. 2And Meshelemiah had 
sons: Zechariah the first-born, Jediael 
the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel 
the fourth; 3Elam the fifth, Jehohanan 
the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh. 4And 
Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the 
first-born, Jehozabad the second, Joah 
the third, and Sacar the fourth, and 
Nethanel the fifth; 5Ammiel the sixth, 
Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the 
eighth; for God blessed him. 6Also 
unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, 
that ruled over the house of their 
father; for they were mighty men of 
26 




valour. 7The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, 
and Rephael and Obed and Elzabad his 
brethren, valiant men; Elihu also, and 
Semachiah. 8All these were of the sons 
of Obed-edom: they and their sons and 
their brethren, able men in strength for 
the service; threescore and two of 
Obed-edom. 9And Meshelemiah had 
sons and brethren, valiant men, 
eighteen. 10Also Hosah, of the children 
of Merari, had sons: Shimri the 
chief—for though he was not the 
firstborn, yet his father made him 
chief—11Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah 
the third, Zechariah the fourth; all the 
sons and brethren of Hosah were 
thirteen. 

12These courses of the doorkeepers, 
even the chief men, had wards over 
against their brethren, to minister in 
the house of the LORD. 13And they cast 
lots, as well the small as the great, 
according to their fathers’houses, for 
every gate. 14And the lot eastward fell 
to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his 
son, a discreet counsellor, they cast 
lots; and his lot came out northward. 
15To Obed-edom southward; and to his 
sons the Storehouse. 16To Shuppim 
and Hosah westward, by the gate of 
Shallecheth, at the causeway that 
goeth up, ward against ward. 
17Eastward were six Levites, 
northward four a day, southward four a 
day, and for the Storehouse two and 
two. 18For the Precinct westward, four 
at the causeway, and two at the 
Precinct. 19These were the courses of 
the doorkeepers; of the sons of the 
Korahites, and of the sons of Merari. 

20And of the Levites, Ahijah was 
over the treasuries of the house of 
God, and over the treasuries of the 
hallowed things. 21The sons of Ladan, 
the sons of the Gershonites belonging 
to Ladan, the heads of the 
fathers’houses belonging to Ladan the 
Gershonite: Jehieli. 22The sons of 
Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his brother, 
over the treasuries of the house of the 
LORD. 23Of the Amramites, of the 
Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the 
Uzzielites; 24Shebuel the son of 
Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler 
over the treasuries. 25And his brethren 
by Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, and 
Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, 
and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his 
son. 26This aShelomith and his brethren 
were over all the treasuries of the 
dedicated things, which David the 
king, and the heads of the 
fathers’houses, the captains over 
thousands and hundreds, and the 
captains of the host, had dedicated. 
27Out of the spoil won in battles did 
they dedicate to repair the house of the 
LORD. 28And all that Samuel the seer, 
and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner 
the son of Ner, and Joab the son of 
Zeruiah, had dedicated; whosoever had 
dedicated any thing, it was under the 
hand of Shelomith, and of his brethren. 

a Heb. Shelomoth. 

29Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and 
his sorts were for the outward business 


over Israel, for officers and judges. 
30Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his 
brethren, men of valour, a thousand 
and seven hundred, had the oversight 
of Israel beyond the Jordan westward; 
for all the business of the LORD, and 
for the service of the king. 31Of the 
Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even 
of the Hebronites, according to their 
generations by fathers’houses. In the 
fortieth year of the reign of David they 
were sought for, and there were found 
among them mighty men of valour at 
Jazer of Gilead. 32And his brethren, 
men of valour, were two thousand and 
seven hundred, heads of 
fathers’houses, whom king David 
made overseers over the Reubenites, 
and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of 
the Manassites, for every matter 
pertaining to God, and for the affairs 
of the king. 

Now the children of Israel 
after their number, to wit, the 
heads of fathers’houses and the 
captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
and their officers that served the king, 
in any matter of the courses which 
came in and went out month by month 
throughout all the months of the year, 
of every course were twenty and four 
thousand. 2Over the first course for the 
first month was Jashobeam the son of 
Zabdiel; and in his course were twenty 
and four thousand. 3Of the children of 
Perez was he, and the chief of all the 
captains of the host for the first month. 
4And over the course of the second 
month was Dodai the Ahohite, and his 
course, and Mikloth the ruler; and in 
his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 5The third captain of the 
host for the third month was Benaiah 
the son of Jehoiada, the priest, chief; 
and in his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 6This is that Benaiah, who 
was the mighty man of the thirty, and 
over the thirty; and of his course was 
Ammizabad his son. 7The fourth 
captain for the fourth month was 
Asahel the brother of Joab, and 
Zebadiah his son after him; and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 
8The fifth captain for the fifth month 
was Shamhuth the Izrahite; and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 
9The sixth captain for the sixth month 
was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; 
and in his course were twenty and four 
thousand. 10The seventh captain for the 
seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, 
of the children of Ephraim; and in his 
course were twenty and four thousand. 
11The eighth captain for the eighth 
month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of 
the Zerahites; and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 12The ninth 
captain for the ninth month was 
Abiezer the Anathothite, of the 
Benjamites; and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 13The tenth 
captain for the tenth month was 
Mahrai, the Netophathite, of the 
Zerahites; and in his course were 
twenty and four thousand. 14The 
eleventh captain for the eleventh 
month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of 
the children of Ephraim; and in his 
27 




course were twenty and four thousand. 
15The twelfth captain for the twelfth 
month was Heldai the Netophathite, of 
Othniel; and in his course were twenty 
and four thousand. 

16Furthermore over the tribes of 
Israel: of the Reubenites was Eliezer 
the son of Zichri the ruler; of the 
Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of 
Maacah; 17of Levi, Hashabiah the son 
of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok; 18of 
Judah, Elihu, one of the brethren of 
David; of Issachar, Omri the son of 
Michael; 19of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the 
son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jerimoth 
the son of Azriel; 20of the children of 
Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; 
of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the 
son of Pedaiah; 21of the half-tribe of 
Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of 
Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the 
son of Abner; 22of Dan, Azarel the son 
of Jeroham. These were the captains of 
the tribes of Israel. 23But David took 
not the number of them from twenty 
years old and under; because the LORD 
had said He would increase Israel like 
to the stars of heaven. 24Joab the son of 
Zeruiah began to number, but finished 
not; and there came wrath for this 
upon Israel; neither was the number 
put into the account in the chronicles 
of king David. 

25And over the king’s treasuries 
was Azmaveth the son of Adiel; and 
over the treasuries in the fields, in the 
cities, and in the villages, and in the 
towers, was Jonathan the son of 
Uzziah; 26and over them that did the 
work of the field for tillage of the 
ground was Ezri the son of Chelub; 
27and over the vineyards was Shimei 
the Ramathite; and over the increase of 
the vineyards for the wine-cellars was 
Zabdi the Shiphmite; 28and over the 
olive-trees and the sycomore-trees that 
were in the Lowland was Baal-hanan 
the Gederite; and over the cellars of oil 
was Joash; 29and over the herds that 
fed in Sharon was Shirtai the 
Sharonite; and over the herds that were 
in the valleys was Shaphat the son of 
Adlai; 30and over the camels was Obil 
the Ishmaelite; and over the asses was 
Jehdeiah the Meronothite; 31and over 
the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite. All 
these were the rulers of the substance 
which was king David’s. 

32Also Jonathan David’s uncle was 
a counsellor, a man of understanding, 
and a scribe; and Jehiel the son of 
Hachmoni was with the king’s sons; 
33and Ahithophel was the king’s 
counsellor; and Hushai the Archite 
was the king’s friend; 34and after 
Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of 
Benaiah, and Abiathar; and the captain 
of the king’s host was Joab. 

And David assembled all the 
princes of Israel, the princes of 
the tribes, and the captains of the 
companies that served the king by 
course, and the captains of thousands, 
and the captains of hundreds, and the 
rulers over all the substance and cattle 
of the king and of his sons, with the 
officers, and the mighty men, even all 
the mighty men of valour, unto 
28 




Jerusalem. 2Then David the king stood 
up upon his feet, and said: ‘Hear me, 
my brethren, and my people; as for 
me, it was in my heart to build a house 
of rest for the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD, and for the footstool of our 
God; and I had made ready for the 
building. 3But God said unto me: Thou 
shalt not build a house for My name, 
because thou art a man of war, and 
hast shed blood. 4Howbeit the LORD, 
the God of Israel, chose me out of all 
the house of my father to be king over 
Israel for ever; for He hath chosen 
Judah to be prince, and in the house of 
Judah, the house of my father, and 
among the sons of my father He took 
pleasure in me to make me king over 
all Israel; 5and of all my sons—for the 
LORD hath given me many sons—He 
hath chosen Solomon my son to sit 
upon the throne of the kingdom of the 
LORD over Israel. 6And He said unto 
me: Solomon thy son, he shall build 
My house and My courts; for I have 
chosen him to be to Me for a son, and I 
will be to him for a father. 7And I will 
establish his kingdom for ever, if he be 
constant to do My commandments and 
Mine ordinances, as at this day. 8Now 
therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the 
congregation of the LORD, and in the 
hearing of our God, observe and seek 
out all the commandments of the LORD 
your God; that ye may possess this 
good land, and leave it for an 
inheritance to your children after you 
for ever. 

9And thou, Solomon my son, know 
thou the God of thy father, and serve 
Him with a whole heart and with a 
willing mind; for the LORD searcheth 
all hearts, and understandeth all the 
imaginations of the thoughts; if thou 
seek Him, He will be found of thee; 
but if thou forsake Him, He will cast 
thee off for ever. 10Take heed now; for 
the LORD hath chosen thee to build a 
house for the sanctuary; be strong, and 
do it.’ 

11Then David gave to Solomon his 
son the pattern of the porch [of the 
temple], and of the houses thereof, and 
of the treasuries thereof, and of the 
upper rooms thereof, and of the inner 
chambers thereof, and of the place of 
the ark-cover; 12and the pattern of all 
that he had by the spirit, for the courts 
of the house of the LORD, and for all 
the chambers round about, for the 
treasuries of the house of God, and for 
the treasuries of the hallowed things; 
13also for the courses of the priests and 
the Levites, and for all the work of the 
service of the house of the LORD, and 
for all the vessels of service in the 
house of the LORD: 14of gold by weight 
for the vessels of gold, for all vessels 
of every kind of service; of silver for 
all the vessels of silver by weight, for 
all vessels of every kind of service; 
15by weight also for the candlesticks of 
gold, and for the lamps thereof, of 
gold, by weight for every candlestick 
and for the lamps thereof; and for the 
candlesticks of silver, silver by weight 
for every candlestick and for the lamps 


thereof, according to the use of every 
candlestick; 16and the gold by weight 
for the tables of showbread, for every 
table; and silver for the tables of silver; 
17and the flesh-hooks, and the basins, 
and the jars, of pure gold; and for the 
golden bowls by weight for every 
bowl; and for the silver bowls by 
weight for every bowl; 18and for the 
altar of incense refined gold by 
weight; and gold for the pattern of the 
chariot, even the cherubim, that spread 
out their wings, and covered the ark of 
the covenant of the LORD. 19’All this 
[do I give thee] in writing, as the LORD 
hath made me wise by His hand upon 
me, even all the works of this pattern.’ 

20And David said to Solomon his 
son: ‘Be strong and of good courage, 
and do it; fear not, nor be dismayed; 
for the LORD God, even my God, is 
with thee; He will not fail thee, nor 
forsake thee, until all the work for the 
service of the house of the LORD be 
finished. 21And, behold, there are the 
courses of the priests and the Levites, 
for all the service of the house of God; 
and there shall be with thee in all 
manner of work every willing man that 
hath skill, for any manner of service; 
also the captains and all the people 
will be wholly at thy commandment.’ 

And David the king said unto 
all the congregation: ‘Solomon 
my son, whom alone God hath chosen, 
is yet young and tender, and the work 
is great; for the palace is not for man, 
but for the LORD God. 2Now I have 
prepared with all my might for the 
house of my God the gold for the 
things of gold, and the silver for the 
things of silver, and the brass for the 
things of brass, the iron for the things 
of iron, and wood for the things of 
wood; onyx stones, and stones to be 
set, glistering stones, and of divers 
colours, and all manner of precious 
stones, and marble stones in 
abundance. 3Moreover also, because I 
have set my affection on the house of 
my God, seeing that I have a treasure 
of mine own of gold and silver, I give 
it unto the house of my God, over and 
above all that I have prepared for the 
holy house, 4even three thousand 
talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, 
and seven thousand talents of refined 
silver, wherewith to overlay the walls 
of the houses; 5of gold for the things of 
gold, and of silver for the things of 
silver, and for all manner of work to be 
made by the hands of artificers. Who 
then offereth willingly to consecrate 
himself this day unto the LORD?’ 

6Then the princes of the 
fathers’houses, and the princes of the 
tribes of Israel, and the captains of 
thousands and of hundreds, with the 
rulers over the king’s work, offered 
willingly; 7and they gave for the 
service of the house of God of gold 
five thousand talents and ten thousand 
darics, and of silver ten thousand 
talents, and of brass eighteen thousand 
talents, and of iron a hundred thousand 
talents. 8And they with whom precious 
stones were found gave them to the 
treasure of the house of the LORD, 
29 




under the hand of Jehiel the 
Gershonite. 9Then the people rejoiced, 
for that they offered willingly, because 
with a whole heart they offered 
willingly to the LORD; and David the 
king also rejoiced with great joy. 

10Wherefore David blessed the 
LORD before all the congregation; and 
David said: ‘Blessed be Thou, O LORD, 
the God of Israel our father, for ever 
and ever. 11Thine, O LORD, is the 
greatness, and the power, and the 
glory, and the victory, and the majesty; 
for all that is in the heaven and in the 
earth is Thine; Thine is the kingdom, 
O LORD, and Thou art exalted as head 
above all. 12Both riches and honour 
come of Thee, and Thou rulest over 
all; and in Thy hand is power and 
might; and in Thy hand it is to make 
great, and to give strength unto all. 
13Now therefore, our God, we thank 
Thee, and praise Thy glorious name. 
14But who am I, and what is my 
people, that we should be able to offer 
so willingly after this sort? for all 
things come of Thee, and of Thine 
own have we given Thee. 15For we are 
strangers before Thee, and sojourners, 
as all our fathers were: our days on the 
earth are as a shadow, and there is no 
abiding. 16O LORD our God, all this 
store that we have prepared to build 
Thee a house for Thy holy name 
cometh of Thy hand, and is all Thine 
own. 17I know also, my God, that Thou 
triest the heart, and hast pleasure in 
uprightness. As for me, in the 
uprightness of my heart I have 
willingly offered all these things; and 
now have I seen with joy Thy people, 
that are present here, offer willingly 
unto Thee. 18O LORD, the God of 
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our 
fathers, keep this for ever, even the 
imagination of the thoughts of the 
heart of Thy people, and direct their 
heart unto Thee; 19and give unto 
Solomon my son a whole heart, to 
keep Thy commandments, Thy 
testimonies, and Thy statutes, and to 
do all these things, and to build the 
palace, for which I have made, 
provision.’ 

20And David said to all the 
congregation: ‘Now bless the LORD 
your God.’ And all the congregation 
blessed the LORD, the God of their 
fathers, and bowed down their heads, 
and prostrated themselves before the 
LORD, and before the king. 21And they 
sacrificed sacrifices unto the LORD, and 
offered burnt-offerings unto the LORD, 
on the morrow after that day, even a 
thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, 
and a thousand lambs, with their drink-
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance 
for all Israel; 22and did eat and drink 
before the LORD on that day with great 
gladness. And they made Solomon the 
son of David king the second time, and 
anointed him unto the LORD to be 
prince, and Zadok to be priest. 23Then 
Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD 
as king instead of David his father, and 
prospered; and all Israel hearkened to 
him. 24And all the princes, and the 
mighty men, and all the sons likewise 


of king David, submitted themselves 
unto Solomon the king. 25And the 
LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly 
in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed 
upon him such royal majesty as had 
not been on any king before him in 
Israel. 

26Now David the son of Jesse 
reigned over all Israel. 27And the time 
that he reigned over Israel was forty 
years: seven years reigned he in 
Hebron, and thirty and three years 
reigned he in Jerusalem. 28And he died 
in a good old age, full of days, riches, 
and honour; and Solomon his son 
reigned in his stead. 29Now the acts of 
David the king, first and last, behold, 
they are written in the words of 
Samuel the seer, and in the words of 
Nathan the prophet, and in the words 
of Gad the seer; 30with all his reign and 
his might, and the times that went over 
him, and over Israel, and over all the 
kingdoms of the countries. 

 

 

 

 





