JUDGES 

 

AND IT came to pass after the 
death of Joshua, that the children 
of Israel asked the LORD, saying: ‘Who 
shall go up for us first against the 
Canaanites, to fight against them?’ 
2And LORD said: ‘Judah shall go up; 
behold, I have delivered the land into 
his hand.’ 3And Judah said unto 
Simeon his brother: ‘Come up with me 
into my lot, that we may fight against 
the Canaanites; and I likewise will go 
with thee into thy lot.’ So Simeon 
went with him. 4And Judah went up; 
and the LORD delivered the Canaanites 
and the Perizzites into their hand; and 
they smote of them in Bezek ten 
thousand men. 5And they found 
Adoni-bezek in Bezek; and they 
fought against him, and they smote the 
Canaanites and the Perizzites. 6But 
Adoni-bezek fled; and they pursued 
after him, and caught him, and cut off 
his thumbs and his great toes. 7And 
Adoni-bezek said: ‘Threescore and ten 
kings, having their thumbs and their 
great toes cut off, gathered food under 
my table; as I have done, so God hath 
requited me.’ And they brought him to 
Jerusalem, and he died there. 

8And the children of Judah fought 
Jerusalem, and took it, and smote it 
with the edge of the sword, and set the 
city on fire. 9And afterward the 
children of Judah went down to fight 
against the Canaanites that dwelt in the 
hill-country, and in the South, and in 
the Lowland. 10And Judah went 
against the Canaanites that dwelt in 
Hebron—now the name of Hebron 
beforetime was Kiriath-arba—and they 
smote Sheshai, and Ahiman, and 
Talmai. 11And from thence he went 
against the inhabitants of Debir—now 
the name of Debir beforetime was 
Kiriath-sepher. 12And Caleb said: ‘He 
that smiteth Kiriath-sepher, and taketh 
it, to him will I give Achsah my 
daughter to wife.’ 13And Othniel the 
son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger 
brother, took it; and he gave him 
Achsah his daughter to wife. 14And it 
came to pass, when she came unto 
him, that she moved him to ask of her 
father a field; and she alighted from 
off her ass; and Caleb said unto her: 
‘What wouldest thou?’ 15And she said 
unto him: ‘Give me a blessing; for that 
thou hast set me in the Southland, give 
me therefore springs of water.’ And 
Caleb gave her the Upper Springs and 
the Nether Springs. 

16And the children of the Kenite, 
Moses’father-in-law, went up out of 
the city of palm-trees with the children 
of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, 
which is in the south of Arad; and they 
went and dwelt with the people. 17And 
Judah went with Simeon his brother, 
1 




and they smote the Canaanites that 
inhabited Zephath, and utterly 
destroyed it. And the name of the city 
was called Hormah. 18Also Judah took 
Gaza with the border thereof, and 
Ashkelon with the border thereof, and 
Ekron with the border thereof. 19And 
the LORD was with Judah; and he drove 
out the inhabitants of the hill-country; 
for he could not drive out the 
inhabitants of the valley, because they 
had chariots of iron. 20And they gave 
Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses had 
spoken; and he drove out thence the 
three sons of Anak. 21And the children 
of Benjamin did not drive out the 
Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but 
the Jebusites dwelt with the children of 
Benjamin in Jerusalem, unto this day. 

22And the house of Joseph, they also 
went up against Beth-el; and the LORD 
was with them. 23And the house of 
Joseph sent to spy out Beth-el—now 
the name of the city beforetime was 
Luz. 24And the watchers saw a man 
come forth out of the city, and they 
said unto him: ‘Show us, we pray thee, 
the entrance into the city, and we will 
deal kindly with thee.’ 25And he 
showed them the entrance into the city, 
and they smote the city with the edge 
of the sword; but they let the man go 
and all his family. 26And the man went 
into the land of the Hittites, and built a 
city, and called the name thereof Luz, 
which is the name thereof unto this 
day. 

27And Manasseh did not drive out 
the inhabitants of Beth-shean and its 
towns, nor of Taanach and its towns, 
nor the inhabitants of Dor and its 
towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam 
and its towns, nor the inhabitants of 
Megiddo and its towns; but the 
Canaanites were resolved to dwell in 
that land. 28And it came to pass, when 
Israel was waxen strong, that they put 
the Canaanites to task-work, but did in 
no wise drive them out. 

29And Ephraim drove not out the 
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the 
Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among 
them. 

30Zebulun drove not out the 
inhabitants of Kitron, nor the: 
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the 
Canaanites dwelt among them, and 
became tributary. 

31Asher drove not out the inhabitants 
of Acco, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, 
nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of 
Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob; 
32but the Asherites dwelt among the 
Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; 
for they did not drive them out. 

33Naphtali drove not out the 
inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the 
inhabitants of Beth-anath; but he dwelt 
among the Canaanites, the inhabitants 
of the land; nevertheless the 
inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of 
Beth-anath became tributary unto 
them. 

34And the Amorites forced the 
children of Dan into the hill-country; 
for they would not suffer them to come 
down to the valley. 35But the Amorites 
were resolved to dwell in Harheres, in 


Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; yet the hand 
of the house of Joseph prevailed, so 
that they became tributary. 36And the 
border of the Amorites was from the 
ascent of Akrabbim, from Sela, and 
upward. 

And the angel of the LORD came 
up from Gilgal to Bochim. And 
he said: ‘. . . I made you to go up out 
of Egypt, and have brought you unto 
the land which I swore unto your 
fathers; and I said: I will never break 
My covenant with you; 2and ye shall 
make no covenant with the inhabitants 
of this land; ye shall break down their 
altars; but ye have not hearkened unto 
My voice; what is this ye have done? 
3Wherefore I also said: I will not drive 
them out from before you; but they 
shall be unto you as snares, and their 
gods shall be a trap unto you.’ 4And it 
came to pass, when the angel of the 
LORD spoke these words unto all the 
children of Israel, that the people lifted 
up their voice, and wept. 5And they 
called the name of that place aBochim; 
and they sacrificed there unto the 
LORD. 

a That is, Weepers. 

6Now when Joshua had sent the 
people away, the children of Israel 
went every man unto his inheritance to 
possess the land. 7And the people 
served the LORD all the days of Joshua, 
and all the days of the elders that 
outlived Joshua, who had seen all the 
great work of the LORD, that He had 
wrought for Israel. 8And Joshua the 

son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, 
died, being a hundred and ten years 
old. 9And they buried him in the 
border of his inheritance in Timnath-
heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim, 
on the north of the mountain of Gaash. 
10And also all that generation were 
gathered unto their fathers; and there 
arose another generation after them, 
that knew not the LORD, nor yet the 
work which He had wrought for Israel. 

11And the children of Israel did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, and served the Baalim. 12And 
they forsook the LORD, the God of their 
fathers, who brought them out of the 
land of Egypt, and followed other 
gods, of the gods of the peoples that 
were round about them, and 
worshipped them; and they provoked 
the LORD. 13And they forsook the LORD, 
and served Baal and the Ashtaroth. 
14And the anger of the LORD was 
kindled against Israel, and He 
delivered them into the hands of 
spoilers that spoiled them, and He 
gave them over into the hands of their 
enemies round about, so that they 
could not any longer stand before their 
enemies. 15Whithersoever they went 
out, the hand of the LORD was against 
them for evil, as the LORD had spoken, 
and as the LORD had sworn unto them; 
and they were sore distressed. 16And 
the LORD raised up judges, who saved 
them out of the hand of those that 
spoiled them. 17And yet they 
hearkened not unto their judges, for 
they went astray after other gods, and 
2 




worshipped them; they turned aside 
quickly out of the way wherein their 
fathers walked, obeying the 
commandments of the LORD; they did 
not so. 18And when the LORD raised 
them up judges, then the LORD was 
with the judge, and saved them out of 
the hand of their enemies all the days 
of the judge; for it repented the LORD 
because of their groaning by reason of 
them that oppressed them and crushed 
them. 19But it came to pass, when the 
judge was dead, that they turned back, 
and dealt more corruptly than their 
fathers, in following other gods to 
serve them, and to worship them; they 
left nothing undone of their practices, 
nor of their stubborn way. 20And the 
anger of the LORD was kindled against 
Israel; and He said: ‘Because this 
nation have transgressed My covenant 
which I commanded their fathers, and 
have not hearkened unto My voice; 21I 
also will not henceforth drive out any 
from before them of the nations that 
Joshua left when he died; 22that by 
them I may prove Israel, whether they 
will keep the way of the LORD to walk 
therein, as their fathers did keep it, or 
not.’ 23So the LORD left those nations, 
without driving them out hastily; 
neither delivered He them into the 
hand of Joshua. 

Now these are the nations which 
the LORD left, to prove Israel by 
them, even as many as had not known 
all the wars of Canaan; 2only that the 
generations of the children of Israel 
might know, to teach them war, at the 
least such as beforetime knew nothing 
thereof; 3namely, the five lords of the 
Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and 
the Zidonians, and the Hivites that 
dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount 
Baal-hermon unto the entrance of 
Hamath. 4And they were there, to 
prove Israel by them, to know whether 
they would hearken unto the 
commandments of the LORD, which He 
commanded their fathers by the hand 
of Moses. 5And the children of Israel 
dwelt among the Canaanites, the 
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the 
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the 
Jebusites; 6and they took their 
daughters to be their wives, and gave 
their own daughters to their sons, and 
served their gods. 

7And the children of Israel did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, and forgot the LORD their God, 
and served the Baalim and the 
Asheroth. 8Therefore the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against Israel, and 
He gave them over into the hand of 
Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram-
naharaim; and the children of Israel 
served Cushan-rishathaim eight years. 
9And when the children of Israel cried 
unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a 
saviour to the children of Israel, who 
saved them, even Othniel the son of 
Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother. 10And 
the spirit of the LORD came upon him, 
and he judged Israel; and he went out 
to war, and the LORD delivered 
Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram into 
his hand; and his hand prevailed 
3 




against Cushan-rishathaim. 11And the 
land had rest forty years. And Othniel 
the son of Kenaz died. 

12And the children of Israel again 
did that which was evil in the sight of 
the LORD; and the LORD strengthened 
Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, 
because they had done that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD. 13And he 
gathered unto him the children of 
Ammon and Amalek; and he went and 
smote Israel, and they possessed the 
city of palm-trees. 14And the children 
of Israel served Eglon the king of 
Moab eighteen years. 15But when the 
children of Israel cried unto the LORD, 
the LORD raised them up a saviour, 
Ehud the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a 
man left-handed; and the children of 
Israel sent a present by him unto Eglon 
the king of Moab. 16And Ehud made 
him a sword which had two edges, of a 
cubit length; and he girded it under his 
raiment upon his right thigh. 17And he 
offered the present unto Eglon king of 
Moab—now Eglon was a very fat 
man. 18And when he had made an end 
of offering the present, he sent away 
the people that bore the present. 19But 
he himself turned back from the 
quarries that were by Gilgal, and said: 
‘I have a secret errand unto thee, O 
king.’ And he said: ‘Keep silence.’ 
And all that stood by him went out 
from him. 20And Ehud came unto him; 
and he was sitting by himself alone in 
his cool upper chamber. And Ehud 
said: ‘I have a message from God unto 
thee.’ And he arose out of his seat. 
21And Ehud put forth his left hand, and 
took the sword from his right thigh, 
and thrust it into his belly. 22And the 
haft also went in after the blade; and 
the fat closed upon the blade, for he 
drew not the sword out of his belly; 
and it came out behind. 23Then Ehud 
went forth into the porch, and shut the 
doors of the upper chamber upon him, 
and locked them. 24Now when he was 
gone out, his servants came; and they 
saw, and, behold, the doors of the 
upper chamber were locked; and they, 
said: ‘Surely he is covering his feet in 
the cabinet of the cool chamber.’ 
25And they tarried till they were 
ashamed; and, behold, he opened not 
the doors of the upper chamber; 
therefore they took the key, and 
opened them; and, behold, their lord 
was fallen down dead on the earth. 
26And Ehud escaped while they 
lingered, having passed beyond the 
quarries, and escaped unto Seirah. 
27And it came to pass, when he was 
come, that he blew a horn in the hill-
country of Ephraim, and the children 
of Israel went down with him from the 
hill-country, and he before them. 
28And he said unto them: ‘Follow after 
me; for the LORD hath delivered your 
enemies the Moabites into your hand.’ 
And they went down after him, and 
took the fords of the Jordan against the 
Moabites, and suffered not a man to 
pass over. 29And they smote of Moab 
at that time about ten thousand men, 
every lusty man, and every man of 
valour; and there escaped not a man. 


30So Moab was subdued that day under 
the hand of Israel. And the land had 
rest fourscore years. 

31And after him was Shamgar the 
son of Anath, who smote of the 
Philistines six hundred men with an 
ox-goad; and he also saved Israel. 

And the children of Israel again 
did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD, when Ehud was 
dead. 2And the LORD gave them over 
into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, 
that reigned in Hazor; the captain of 
whose host was Sisera, who dwelt in 
Harosheth-goiim. 3And the children of 
Israel cried unto the LORD; for he had 
nine hundred chariots of iron; and 
twenty years he mightily oppressed the 
children of Israel. 

4Now Deborah, a prophetess, the 
wife of Lappidoth, she judged Israel at 
that time. 5And she sat under the palm-
tree of Deborah between Ramah and 
Beth-el in the hill-country of Ephraim; 
and the children of Israel came up to 
her for judgment. 6And she sent and 
called Barak the son of Abinoam out 
of Kedesh-naphtali, and said unto him: 
‘Hath not the LORD, the God of Israel, 
commanded, saying: Go and draw 
toward mount Tabor, and take with 
thee ten thousand men of the children 
of Naphtali and of the children of 
Zebulun? 7And I will draw unto thee to 
the brook Kishon Sisera, the captain of 
Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his 
multitude; and I will deliver him into 
thy hand. 8And Barak said unto her: ‘If 
thou wilt go with me, then I will go; 
but if thou wilt not go with me, I will 
not go.’ 9And she said: ‘I will surely 
go with thee; notwithstanding the 
journey that thou takest shall not be for 
thy honour; for the LORD will give 
Sisera over into the hand of a woman.’ 
And Deborah arose, and went with 
Barak to Kedesh. 10And Barak called 
Zebulun and Naphtali together to 
Kedesh; and there went up ten 
thousand men at his feet; and Deborah 
went up with him. 

11Now Heber the Kenite had severed 
himself from the Kenites, even from 
the children of Hobab the father-in-law 
of Moses, and had pitched his tent as 
far as Elon-bezaanannim, which is by 
Kedesh. 

12And they told Sisera that Barak the 
son of Abinoam was gone up to mount 
Tabor. 13And Sisera gathered together 
all his chariots, even nine hundred 
chariots of iron, and all the people that 
were with him, from Harosheth-goiim, 
unto the brook Kishon. 14And Deborah 
said unto Barak: ‘Up; for this is the 
day in which the LORD hath delivered 
Sisera into thy hand; is not the LORD 
gone out before thee?’ So Barak went 
down from mount Tabor, and ten 
thousand men after him. 15And the 
LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his 
chariots, and all his host, with the edge 
of the sword before Barak; and Sisera 
alighted from his chariot, and fled 
away on his feet. 16But Barak pursued 
after the chariots, and after the host, 
unto Harosheth-goiim; and all the host 
4 




of Sisera fell by the edge of the sword; 
there was not a man left. 

17Howbeit Sisera fled away on his 
feet to the tent of Jael the wife of 
Heber the Kenite; for there was peace 
between Jabin the king of Hazor and 
the house of Heber the Kenite. 18And 
Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said 
unto him: ‘Turn in, my lord, turn in to 
me; fear not.’ And he turned in unto 
her into the tent, and she covered him 
with a rug. 19And he said unto her: 
‘Give me, I pray thee, a little water to 
drink; for I am thirsty.’ And she 
opened a bottle of milk, and gave him 
drink, and covered him. 20And he said 
unto her: ‘Stand in the door of the tent, 
and it shall be, when any man doth 
come and inquire of thee, and say: Is 
there any man here? that thou shalt 
say: No.’ 21Then Jael Heber’s wife 
took a tent-pin, and took a hammer in 
her hand, and went softly unto him, 
and smote the pin into his temples, and 
it pierced through into the ground; for 
he was in a deep sleep; so he swooned 
and died. 22And, behold, as Barak 
pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet 
him, and said unto him: ‘Come, and I 
will show thee the man whom thou 
seekest.’ And he came unto her; and, 
behold, Sisera lay dead, and the tent-
pin was in his temples. 23So God 
subdued on that day Jabin the king of 
Canaan before the children of Israel. 
24And the hand of the children of Israel 
prevailed more and more against Jabin 
the king of Canaan, until they had 
destroyed Jabin king of Canaan. 

 

Then sang Deborah and Barak the 
son of Abinoam on that day, 
saying: 

2When men let grow their hair in 
Israel, 

When the people offer themselves 
willingly, 

Bless ye the LORD. 

3Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye 
princes; 

I, unto the LORD will I sing; 

I will sing praise to the LORD, the 
God of Israel. 

 

4LORD, when Thou didst go forth out 
of 

Seir, 

When Thou didst march out of the 
field of Edom, 

The earth trembled, the heavens also 
dropped, 

Yea, the clouds dropped water. 

5The mountains quaked at the 
presence of the LORD, 

Even yon Sinai at the presence of 
the LORD, the God of Israel. 

 

6In the days of Shamgar the son of 
Anath, 

In the days of Jael, the highways 
ceased, 

And the travellers walked through 
byways. 

7The rulers ceased in Israel, they 
ceased, 

Until that thou didst arise, Deborah, 

That thou didst arise a mother in 
Israel. 
5 




8They chose new gods; 

Then was war in the gates; 

Was there a shield or spear seen 

Among forty thousand in Israel? 

 

9My heart is toward the governors of 

Israel, 

That offered themselves willingly 
among the people. 

Bless ye the LORD. 

10Ye that ride on white asses, 

Ye that sit on rich cloths, 

And ye that walk by the way, tell of 
it; 

11Louder than the voice of archers, 
by the watering-troughs! 

There shall they rehearse the 
righteous acts of the LORD, 

Even the righteous acts of His rulers 
in Israel. 

Then the people of the LORD went 
down to the gates. 

 

12Awake, awake, Deborah; 

Awake, awake, utter a song; 

Arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity 

 captive, thou son of Abinoam. 

13Then made He a remnant to have 

 dominion over the nobles and the 
people; 

The LORD made me have dominion 
over the mighty. 

14Out of Ephraim came they whose 
root is in Amalek; 

After thee, Benjamin, among thy 
peoples; 

Out of Machir came down 
governors, 

And out of Zebulun they that handle 
the marshal’s staff. 

15And the princes of Issachar were 
with 

Deborah; 

As was Issachar, so was Barak; 

Into the valley they rushed forth at 
his feet. 

Among the divisions of Reuben 

There were great resolves of heart. 

16Why sattest thou among the sheep-
folds, 

To hear the pipings for the flocks? 

At the divisions of Reuben 

There were great searchings of 
heart. 

17Gilead abode beyond the Jordan; 

And Dan, why doth he sojourn by 
the ships? 

Asher dwelt at the shore of the sea, 

And abideth by its bays. 

18Zebulun is a people that jeoparded 
their lives unto the death, 

And Naphtali, upon the high places 
of the field. 

 

19The kings came, they fought; 

Then fought the kings of Canaan, 

In Taanach by the waters of 
Megiddo; 

They took no gain of money. 

20They fought from heaven, 

The stars in their courses fought 
against Sisera. 

21The brook Kishon swept them 
away, 

That ancient brook, the brook 
Kishon. 


O my soul, tread them down with 
strength. 

22Then did the horsehoofs stamp 

By reason of the prancings, the 
prancings of their mighty ones. 

23’Curse ye Meroz’, said the angel 
of the LORD, 

‘Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants 
thereof, 

Because they came not to the help 
of the LORD, 

To the help of the LORD against the 
mighty.’ 

24Blessed above women shall Jael 
be, 

The wife of Heber the Kenite, 

Above women in the tent shall she 
be blessed. 

25Water he asked, milk she gave 
him; 

In a lordly bowl she brought him 
curd. 

26Her hand she put to the tent-pin, 

And her right hand to the 
workmen’s hammer; 

And with the hammer she smote 
Sisera, she smote through his 
head, 

Yea, she pierced and struck through 
his temples. 

27At her feet he sunk, he fell, he lay; 

At her feet he sunk, he fell; 

Where he sunk, there he fell down 
dead. 

 

28Through the window she looked 
forth, and peered, 

The mother of Sisera, through the 
lattice: 

‘Why is his chariot so long in 
coming? 

Why tarry the wheels of his 
chariots? 

29The wisest of her princesses 
answer her, 

Yea, she returneth answer to herself: 

30’Are they not finding, are they not 

 dividing the spoil? 

A damsel, two damsels to every 
man; 

To Sisera a spoil of dyed garments, 

A spoil of dyed garments of 
embroidery, 

Two dyed garments of broidery for 
the neck of every spoiler?’ 

 

31So perish all Thine enemies, O 
LORD; 

But they that love Him be as the sun 
when he goeth forth in his might. 

And the land had rest forty years. 

And the children of Israel did that 
which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD; and the LORD delivered them 
into the hand of Midian seven years. 
2And the hand of Midian prevailed 
against Israel; and because of Midian 
the children of Israel made them the 
dens which are in the mountains, and 
the caves, and the strongholds. 3And so 
it was, when Israel had sown, that the 
Midianites came up, and the 
Amalekites, and the children of the 
east; they came up against them; 4and 
they encamped against them, and 
destroyed the produce of the earth, till 
thou come unto Gaza, and left no 
sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor 
6 




ox, nor ass. 5For they came up with 
their cattle and their tents, and they 
came in as locusts for multitude; both 
they and their camels were without 
number; and they came into the land to 
destroy it. 6And Israel was brought 
very low because of Midian; and the 
children of Israel cried unto the LORD. 

7And it came to pass, when the 
children of Israel cried unto the LORD 
because of Midian, 8that the LORD sent 
a prophet unto the children of Israel; 
and he said unto them: ‘Thus saith the 
LORD, the God of Israel: I brought you 
up from Egypt, and brought you forth 
out of the house of bondage; 9and I 
delivered you out of the hand of the 
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all 
that oppressed you, and drove them 
out from before you, and gave you 
their land. 10And I said unto you: I am 
the LORD your God; ye shall not fear 
the gods of the Amorites, in whose 
land ye dwell; but ye have not 
hearkened unto My voice.’ 

11And the angel of the LORD came, 
and sat under the terebinth which was 
in Ophrah, that belonged unto Joash 
the Abiezrite; and his son Gideon was 
beating out wheat in the winepress, to 
hide it from the Midianites. 12And the 
angel of the LORD appeared unto him, 
and said unto him: ‘The LORD is with 
thee, thou mighty man of valour.’ 
13And Gideon said unto him: ‘Oh, my 
lord, if the LORD be with us, why then 
is all this befallen us? and where are 
all His wondrous works which our 
fathers told us of, saying: Did not the 
LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now 
the LORD hath cast us off, and 
delivered us into the hand of Midian.’ 
14And the LORD turned towards him, 
and said: ‘Go in this thy might, and 
save Israel from the hand of Midian; 
have not I sent thee?’ 15And he said 
unto him: ‘Oh, my lord, wherewith 
shall I save Israel? behold, my family 
is the poorest in Manasseh, and I am 
the least in my father’s house.’ 16And 
the LORD said unto him: ‘Surely I will 
be with thee, and thou shalt smite the 
Midianites as one man.’ 17And he said 
unto him: ‘If now I have found favour 
in thy sight, then show me a sign that 
it is thou that talkest with me. 18Depart 
not hence, I pray thee, until I come 
unto thee, and bring forth my present, 
and lay it before thee.’ And he said: ‘I 
will tarry until thou come back.’ 19And 
Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, 
and unleavened cakes of an ephah of 
meal; the flesh he put in a basket, and 
he put the broth in a pot, and brought it 
out unto him under the terebinth, and 
presented it. 20And the angel of God 
said unto him: ‘Take the flesh and the 
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon 
this rock, and pour out the broth.’ And 
he did so. 21Then the angel of the LORD 
put forth the end of the staff that was 
in his hand, and touched the flesh and 
the unleavened cakes; and there went 
up fire out of the rock, and consumed 
the flesh and the unleavened cakes; 
and the angel of the LORD departed out 
of his sight. 22And Gideon saw that he 
was the angel of the LORD; and Gideon 


said: ‘Alas, O Lord GOD! forasmuch as 
I have seen the angel of the LORD face 
to face.’ 23And the LORD said unto him: 
‘Peace be unto thee; fear not; thou 
shalt not die.’ 24Then Gideon built an 
altar there unto the LORD, and called it 
a‘Adonai-shalom’; unto this day it is 
yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 

a That is, The LORD is peace. 

25And it came to pass the same 
night, that the LORD said unto him: 
‘Take thy father’s bullock, and the 
second bullock of seven years old, and 
throw down the altar of Baal that thy 
father hath, and cut down the Asherah 
that is by it; 26and build an altar unto 
the LORD thy God upon the top of this 
stronghold, in the ordered place, and 
take the second bullock, and offer a 
burnt-offering with the wood of the 
Asherah which thou shalt cut down.’ 
27Then Gideon took ten men of his 
servants, and did as the LORD had 
spoken unto him; and it came to pass, 
because he feared his father’s 
household and the men of the city, so 
that he could not do it by day, that he 
did it by night. 28And when the men of 
the city arose early in the morning, 
behold, the altar of Baal was broken 
down, and the Asherah was cut down 
that was by it, and the second bullock 
was offered upon the altar that was 
built. 29And they said one to another: 
‘Who hath done this thing?’ And when 
they inquired and asked, they said: 
‘Gideon the son of Joash hath done 
this thing.’ 30Then the men of the city 

said unto Joash: ‘Bring out thy son, 
that he may die; because he hath 
broken down the altar of Baal, and 
because he hath cut down the Asherah 
that was by it.’ 31And Joash said unto 
all that stood against him: ‘Will ye 
contend for Baal? or will ye save him? 
he that will contend for him, shall be 
put to death before morning; if he be a 
god, let him contend for himself, 
because one hath broken down his 
altar.’ 32Therefore on that day he was 
called bJerubbaal, saying: ‘Let Baal 
contend against him, because he hath 
broken down his altar.’ 

b That is, Let Baal contend. 

33Now all the Midianites and the 
Amalekites and the children of the east 
assembled themselves together; and 
they passed over, and pitched in the 
valley of Jezreel. 34But the spirit of the 
LORD clothed Gideon; and he blew a 
horn; and Abiezer was gathered 
together after him. 35And he sent 
messengers throughout all Manasseh; 
and they also were gathered together 
after him; and he sent messengers unto 
Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto 
Naphtali; and they came up to meet 
them. 36And Gideon said unto God: ‘If 
Thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as 
Thou hast spoken, 37behold, I will put 
a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; 
if there be dew on the fleece only, and 
it be dry upon all the ground, then 
shall I know that Thou wilt save Israel 
by my hand, as Thou hast spoken.’ 
38And it was so; for he rose up early on 


the morrow, and pressed the fleece 
together, and wrung dew out of the 
fleece, a bowlful of water. 39And 
Gideon said unto God: ‘Let not Thine 
anger be kindled against me, and I will 
speak but this once: let me make trial, 
I pray Thee, but this once with the 
fleece; let it now be dry only upon the 
fleece, and upon all the ground let 
there be dew.’ 40And God did so that 
night; for it was dry upon the fleece 
only, and there was dew on all the 
ground. 

Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, 
and all the people that were with 
him, rose up early, and pitched beside 
En-harod; and the camp of Midian was 
on the north side of them, by Gibeath-
moreh, in the valley. 

2And the LORD said unto Gideon: 
‘The people that are with thee are too 
many for Me to give the Midianites 
into their hand, lest Israel vaunt 
themselves against Me, saying: mine 
own hand hath saved me. 3Now 
therefore make proclamation in the 
ears of the people, saying: Whosoever 
is fearful and trembling, let him return 
and depart early from mount Gilead.’ 
And there returned of the people 
twenty and two thousand; and there 
remained ten thousand. 

4And the LORD said unto Gideon: 
‘The people are yet too many; bring 
them down unto the water, and I will 
try them for thee there; and it shall be, 
that of whom I say to thee: This shall 
go with thee, the same shall go with 
thee; and of whomsoever I say unto 
thee: This shall not go with thee, the 
same shall not go.’ 5So he brought 
down the people unto the water; and 
the LORD said unto Gideon: ‘Everyone 
that lappeth of the water with his 
tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt 
thou set by himself; likewise every one 
that boweth down upon his knees to 
drink.’ 6And the number of them that 
lapped, putting their hand to their 
mouth, was three hundred men; but all 
the rest of the people bowed down 
upon their knees to drink water. 7And 
the LORD said unto Gideon: ‘By the 
three hundred men that lapped will I 
save you, and deliver the Midianites 
into thy hand; and let all the people go 
every man unto his place.’ 8So they 
took the victuals of the people in their 
hand, and their horns; and he sent all 
the men of Israel every man unto his 
tent, but retained the three hundred 
men; and the camp of Midian was 
beneath him in the valley. 

9And it came to pass the same night, 
that the LORD said unto him: ‘Arise, get 
thee down upon the camp; for I have 
delivered it into thy hand. 10But if thou 
fear to go down, go thou with Purah 
thy servant down to the camp. 11And 
thou shalt hear what they say; and 
afterward shall thy hands be 
strengthened to go down upon the 
camp.’ Then went he down with Purah 
his servant unto the outermost part of 
the armed men that were in the camp. 
12Now the Midianites and the 
Amalekites and all the children of the 
east lay along in the valley like locusts 
7 




for multitude; and their camels were 
without number, as the sand which is 
upon the sea-shore for multitude. 
13And when Gideon was come, behold, 
there was a man telling a dream unto 
his follow, and saying: ‘Behold, I 
dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of 
barley bread tumbled into the camp of 
Midian, and came unto the tent, and 
smote it that it fell, and turned it 
upside down, that the tent lay flat.’ 
14And his fellow answered and said: 
‘This is nothing else save the sword of 
Gideon the son of Joash, a man of 
Israel: into his hand God hath 
delivered Midian, and all the host.’ 

15And it was so, when Gideon heard 
the telling of the dream, and the 
interpretation thereof, that he 
worshipped; and he returned into the 
camp of Israel, and said: ‘Arise; for 
the LORD hath delivered into your hand 
the host of Midian.’ 16And he divided 
the three hundred men into three 
companies, and he put into the hands 
of all of them horns, and empty 
pitchers, with torches within the 
pitchers. 17And he said unto them: 
‘Look on me, and do likewise; and, 
behold, when I come to the outermost 
part of the camp, it shall be that, as I 
do, so shall ye do. 18When I blow the 
horn, I and all that are with me, then 
blow ye the horns also on every side of 
all the camp, and say: For the LORD 
and for Gideon! ’ 

19So Gideon, and the hundred men 
that were with him, came unto the 
outermost part of the camp in the 
beginning of the middle watch, when 
they had but newly set the watch; and 
they blew the horns, and broke in 
pieces the pitchers that were in their 
hands. 20And the three companies blew 
the horns, and broke the pitchers, and 
held the torches in their left hands, and 
the horns in their right hands 
wherewith to blow; and they cried: 
‘The sword for the LORD and for 
Gideon! ’ 21And they stood every man 
in his place round about the camp; and 
all the host ran; and they shouted, and 
fled. 22And they blew the three 
hundred horns, and the LORD set every 
man’s sword a against his fellow, even 
throughout all the host; and the host 
fled as far as Beth-shittah toward 
Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-
meholah, by Tabbath. 23And the men 
of Israel were gathered together out of 
Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of 
all Manasseh, and pursued after 
Midian. 24And Gideon sent messengers 
throughout all the hill-country of 
Ephraim, saying: ‘Come down against 
Midian, and take before them the 
waters, as far as Beth-barah, and also 
the Jordan.’ So all the men of Ephraim 
were gathered together, and took the 
waters as far as Beth-barah, and also 
the Jordan. 25And they took the two 
princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and 
they slew Oreb at the Rock of Oreb, 
and Zeeb they slew at the Winepress 
of Zeeb, and pursued Midian; and they 
brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to 
Gideon beyond the Jordan. 


And the men of Ephraim said 
unto him: ‘Why hast thou served 
us thus, that thou didst not call us 
when thou wentest to fight with 
Midian?’ And they did chide with him 
sharply. 2And he said unto them: 
‘What have I now done in comparison 
with you? Is not the gleaning of 
Ephraim better than the vintage of 
Abiezer? 3God hath delivered into 
your hand the princes of Midian, Oreb 
and Zeeb; and what was I able to do in 
comparison with you?’ Then their 
anger was abated toward him, when he 
had said that. 

4And Gideon came to the Jordan, 
and passed over, he, and the three 
hundred men that were with him, faint, 
yet pursuing. 5And he said unto the 
men of Succoth: ‘Give, I pray you, 
loaves of bread unto the people that 
follow me; for they are faint, and I am 
pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, 
the kings of Midian.’ 6And the princes 
of Succoth said: ‘Are the hands of 
Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy 
power, that we should give bread unto 
thine army?’ 7And Gideon said: 
‘Therefore when the LORD hath 
delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into 
my hand, then I will tear your flesh 
with the thorns of the wilderness and 
with briers.’ 8And he went up thence to 
Penuel, and spoke unto them in like 
manner; and the men of Penuel 
answered him as the men of Succoth 
had answered. 9And he spoke also unto 
the men of Penuel, saying: ‘When I 
come back in peace, I will break down 
this tower.’ 

10Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in 
Karkor, and their hosts with them, 
about fifteen thousand men, all that 
were left of all the host of the children 
of the east; for there fell a hundred and 
twenty thousand men that drew sword. 
11And Gideon went up by the way of 
them that dwelt in tents on the east of 
Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the 
host; for the host was secure. 12And 
Zebah and Zalmunna fled; and he 
pursued after them; and he took the 
two kings of Midian, Zebah and 
Zalmunna, and discomfited all the 
host. 13And Gideon the son of Joash 
returned from the battle from the 
ascent of Heres. 14And he caught a 
young man of the men of Succoth, and 
inquired of him; and he wrote down 
for him the princes of Succoth, and the 
elders thereof, seventy and seven men. 
15And he came unto the men of 
Succoth, and said: ‘Behold Zebah and 
Zalmunna, concerning whom ye did 
taunt me, saying: Are the hands of 
Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy 
power, that we should give bread unto 
thy men that are weary?’ 16And he 
took the elders of the city, and thorns 
of the wilderness and briers, and with 
them he taught the men of Succoth. 
17And he broke down the tower of 
Penuel, and slew the men of the city. 
18Then said he unto Zebah and 
Zalmunna: ‘Where are the men whom 
ye slew at Tabor?’ And they answered: 
‘As thou art, so were they; of one form 
8 




with the children of a king.’ 19And he 
said: ‘They were my brethren, the sons 
of my mother; as the LORD liveth, if ye 
had saved them alive, I would not slay 
you.’ 20And he said unto Jether his 
first-born: ‘Up, and slay them.’ But the 
youth drew not his sword; for he 
feared, because he was yet a youth. 
21Then Zebah and Zalmunna said: 
‘Rise thou, and fall upon us; for as the 
man is, so is his strength.’ And Gideon 
arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, 
and took the crescents that were on 
their camels’necks. 

22Then the men of Israel said unto 
Gideon: ‘Rule thou over us, both thou, 
and thy son, and thy son’s son also; for 
thou hast saved us out of the hand of 
Midian.’ 23And Gideon said unto them: 
‘I will not rule over you, neither shall 
my son rule over you; the LORD shall 
rule over you.’ 24And Gideon said unto 
them: ‘I would make a request of you, 
that ye would give me every man the 
ear-rings of his spoil.’—For they had 
golden ear-rings, because they were 
Ishmaelites. 25And they answered: ‘We 
will willingly give them.’ And they 
spread a garment, and did cast therein 
every man the ear-rings of his spoil. 
26And the weight of the golden ear-
rings that he requested was a thousand 
and seven hundred shekels of gold; 
beside the crescents, and the pendants, 
and the purple raiment that was on the 
kings of Midian, and beside the chains 
that were about their camels’necks. 
27And Gideon made an ephod thereof, 
and put it in his city, even in Ophrah; 
and all Israel went astray after it there; 
and it became a snare unto Gideon, 
and to his house. 28So Midian was 
subdued before the children of Israel, 
and they lifted up their heads no more. 
And the land had rest forty years in the 
days of Gideon. 

29And Jerubbaal the son of Joash 
went and dwelt in his own house. 
30And Gideon had threescore and ten 
sons of his body begotten; for he had 
many wives. 31And his concubine that 
was in Shechem, she also bore him a 
son, and he called his name 
Abimelech. 32And Gideon the son of 
Joash died in a good old age, and was 
buried in the sepulchre of Joash his 
father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 

33And it came to pass, as soon as 
Gideon was dead, that the children of 
Israel again went astray after the 
Baalim, and made Baal-berith their 
god. 34And the children of Israel 
remembered not the LORD their God, 
who had delivered them out of the 
hand of all their enemies on every 
side; 35neither showed they kindness to 
the house of Jerubbaal, namely 
Gideon, according to all the goodness 
which he had shown unto Israel. 

And Abimelech the son of 
Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto 
his mother’s brethren, and spoke with 
them, and with all the family of the 
house of his mother’s father, saying: 
2’Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all 
the men of Shechem: Which is better 
for you, that all the sons of Jerubbaal, 
who are threescore and ten persons, 
9 




rule over you, or that one rule over 
you? remember also that I am your 
bone and your flesh.’ 3And his 
mother’s brethren spoke of him in the 
ears of all the men of Shechem all 
these words; and their hearts inclined 
to follow Abimelech; for they said: 
‘He is our brother.’ 4And they gave 
him threescore and ten pieces of silver 
out of the house of Baal-berith, 
wherewith Abimelech hired vain and 
light fellows, who followed him. 5And 
he went unto his father’s house at 
Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons 
of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten 
persons, upon one stone; but Jotham 
the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; 
for he hid himself. 

6And all the men of Shechem 
assembled themselves together, and all 
Beth-millo, and went and made 
Abimelech king, by the terebinth of 
the pillar that was in Shechem. 7And 
when they told it to Jotham, he went 
and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, 
and lifted up his voice, and cried, and 
said unto them: ‘Hearken unto me, ye 
men of Shechem, that God may 
hearken unto you. 8The trees went 
forth on a time to anoint a king over 
them; and they said unto the olive-tree: 
Reign thou over us. 9But the olive-tree 
said unto them: Should I leave my 
fatness, seeing that by me they honour 
God and man, and go to hold sway 
over the trees? 10And the trees said to 
the fig-tree: Come thou, and reign over 
us. 11But the fig-tree said unto them: 
Should I leave my sweetness, and my 
good fruitage, and go to hold sway 
over the trees? 12And the trees said 
unto the vine: Come thou, and reign 
over us. 13And the vine said unto them: 
Should I leave my wine, which 
cheereth God and man, and go to hold 
sway over the trees? 14Then said all the 
trees unto the bramble: Come thou, 
and reign over us. 15And the bramble 
said unto the trees: If in truth ye anoint 
me king over you, then come and take 
refuge in my shadow; and if not, let 
fire come out of the bramble, and 
devour the cedars of Lebanon. 16Now 
therefore, if ye have dealt truly and 
uprightly, in that ye have made 
Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt 
well with Jerubbaal and his house, and 
have done unto him according to the 
deserving of his hands—17for my 
father fought for you, and adventured 
his life, and delivered you out of the 
hand of Midian; 18and ye are risen up 
against my father’s house this day, and 
have slain his sons, threescore and ten 
persons, upon one stone, and have 
made Abimelech, the son of his maid-
servant, king over the men of 
Shechem, because he is your brother—
19if ye then have dealt truly and 
uprightly with Jerubbaal and with his 
house this day, then rejoice ye in 
Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in 
you. 20But if not, let fire come out 
from Abimelech, and devour the men 
of Shechem, and Beth-millo; and let 
fire come out from the men of 
Shechem, and from Beth-millo, and 
devour Abimelech.’ 21And Jotham ran 


away, and fled, and went to Beer, and 
dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his 
brother. 

22And Abimelech was prince over 
Israel three years. 23And God sent an 
evil spirit between Abimelech and the 
men of Shechem; and the men of 
Shechem dealt treacherously with 
Abimelech; 24that the violence done to 
the threescore and ten sons of 
Jerubbaal might come, and that their 
blood might be laid upon Abimelech 
their brother, who slew them, and 
upon the men of Shechem, who 
strengthened his hands to slay his 
brethren. 25And the men of Shechem 
set liers-in-wait for him on the tops of 
the mountains, and they robbed all that 
came along that way by them; and it 
was told Abimelech. 

26And Gaal the son of Ebed came 
with his brethren, and went on to 
Shechem; and the men of Shechem put 
their trust in him. 27And they went out 
into the field, and gathered their 
vineyards, and trod the grapes, and 
held festival, and went into the house 
of their god, and did eat and drink, and 
cursed Abimelech. 28And Gaal the son 
of Ebed said: ‘Who is Abimelech, and 
who is Shechem, that we should serve 
him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? 
and Zebul his officer? serve ye the 
men of Hamor the father of Shechem; 
but why should we serve him? 29And 
would that this people were under my 
hand! then would I remove 
Abimelech.’ And he said to 
Abimelech: ‘Increase thine army, and 
come out.’ 30And when Zebul the ruler 
of the city heard the words of Gaal the 
son of Ebed, his anger was kindled. 
31And he sent messengers unto 
Abimelech in Tormah, saying: 
‘Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his 
brethren are come to Shechem; and, 
behold, they will incite the city against 
thee. 32Now therefore, up by night, 
thou and the people that are with thee, 
and lie in wait in the field. 33And it 
shall be, that in the morning, as soon 
as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, 
and set upon the city; and, behold, 
when he and the people that are with 
him come out against thee, then 
mayest thou do to them as thou shalt 
be able.’ 

34And Abimelech rose up, and all 
the people that were with him, by 
night, and they lay in wait against 
Shechem in four companies. 35And 
Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and 
stood in the entrance of the gate of the 
city; and Abimelech rose up, and the 
people that were with him, from the 
ambushment. 36And when Gaal saw 
the people, he said to Zebul: ‘Behold, 
there come people down from the tops 
of the mountains.’ And Zebul said 
unto him: ‘Thou seest the shadow of 
the mountains as if they were men.’ 
37And Gaal spoke again and said: ‘See, 
there come people down by the middle 
of the land, and one company cometh 
by the way of Elon-meonenim.’ 38Then 
said Zebul unto him: ‘Where is now 
thy mouth, that thou saidst: Who is 
Abimelech, that we should serve him? 


is not this the people that thou hast 
despised? go out now, I pray, and fight 
with them.’ 39And Gaal went out 
before the men of Shechem, and 
fought with Abimelech. 40And 
Abimelech chased him, and he fled 
before him, and there fell many 
wounded, even unto the entrance of 
the gate. 41And Abimelech dwelt at 
Arumah; and Zebul drove out Gaal 
and his brethren, that they should not 
dwell in Shechem. 

42And it came to pass on the 
morrow, that the people went out into 
the field; and it was told Abimelech. 
43And he took the people, and divided 
them into three companies, and lay in 
wait in the field; and he looked, and, 
behold, the people were coming forth 
out of the city; and he rose up against 
them, and smote them. 44And 
Abimelech, and the companies that 
were with him, rushed forward, and 
stood in the entrance of the gate of the 
city; and the two companies rushed 
upon all that were in the field, and 
smote them. 45And Abimelech fought 
against the city all that day; and he 
took the city, and slew the people that 
were therein; and he beat down the 
city, and sowed it with salt. 

46And when all the men of the tower 
of Shechem heard thereof, they 
entered into the hold of the house of 
El-berith. 47And it was told Abimelech 
that all the men of the tower of 
Shechem were gathered together. 
48And Abimelech got him up to mount 
Zalmon, he and all the people that 
were with him; and Abimelech took an 
axe in his hand, and cut down a bough 
from the trees, and took it up, and laid 
it on his shoulder; and he said unto the 
people that were with him: ‘What ye 
have seen me do, make haste, and do 
as I have done.’ 49And all the people 
likewise cut down every man his 
bough, and followed Abimelech, and 
put them to the hold, and set the hold 
on fire upon them; so that all the men 
of the tower of Shechem died also, 
about a thousand men and women. 

50Then went Abimelech to Thebez, 
and encamped against Thebez, and 
took it. 51But there was a strong tower 
within the city, and thither fled all the 
men and women, even all they of the 
city, and shut themselves in, and got 
them up to the roof of the tower. 52And 
Abimelech came unto the tower, and 
fought against it, and went close unto 
the door of the tower to burn it with 
fire. 53And a certain woman cast an 
upper millstone upon Abimelech’s 
head, and broke his skull. 54Then he 
called hastily unto the young man his 
armour-bearer, and said unto him: 
‘Draw thy sword, and kill me, that 
men say not of me: A woman slew 
him.’ And his young man thrust him 
through, and he died. 55And when the 
men of Israel saw that Abimelech was 
dead, they departed every man unto his 
place. 56Thus God requited the 
wickedness of Abimelech, which he 
did unto his father, in slaying his 
seventy brethren; 57and all the 
wickedness of the men of Shechem did 


God requite upon their heads; and 
upon them came the curse of Jotham 
the son of Jerubbaal. 

And after Abimelech there 
arose to save Israel Tola the 
son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of 
Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in the 
hill-country of Ephraim. 2And he 
judged Israel twenty and three years, 
and died, and was buried in Shamir. 

3And after him arose Jair, the 
Gileadite; and he judged Israel twenty 
and two years. 4And he had thirty sons 
that rode on thirty ass colts, and they 
had thirty cities, which are called 
aHavvoth-jair unto this day, which are 
in the land of Gilead. 5And Jair died, 
and was buried in Kamon. 

a That is, The villages of Jair. 

6And the children of Israel again did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, and served the Baalim, and the 
Ashtaroth, and the gods of Aram, and 
the gods of Zidon, and the gods of 
Moab, and the gods of the children of 
Ammon, and the gods of the 
Philistines; and they forsook the LORD, 
and served Him not. 7And the anger of 
the LORD was kindled against Israel, 
and He gave them over into the hand 
of the Philistines, and into the hand of 
the children of Ammon. 8And they 
oppressed and crushed the children of 
Israel that year; eighteen years 
[oppressed they] all the children of 
Israel that were beyond the Jordan in 
the land of the Amorites, which is in 
Gilead. 9And the children of Ammon 

passed over the Jordan to fight also 
against Judah, and against Benjamin, 
and against the house of Ephraim, so 
that Israel was sore distressed. 10And 
the children of Israel cried unto the 
LORD, saying: ‘We have sinned against 
Thee, in that we have forsaken our 
God, and have served the Baalim.’ 
11And the LORD said unto the children 
of Israel: ‘Did not I save you from the 
Egyptians, and from the Amorites, 
from the children of Ammon, and from 
the Philistines? 12The Zidonians also, 
and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, 
did oppress you; and ye cried unto Me, 
and I saved you out of their hand. 
13Yet ye have forsaken Me, and served 
other gods; wherefore I will save you 
no more. 14Go and cry unto the gods 
which ye have chosen; let them save 
you in the time of your distress.’ 15And 
the children of Israel said unto the 
LORD: ‘We have sinned; do Thou unto 
us whatsoever seemeth good unto 
Thee; only deliver us, we pray Thee, 
this day.’ 16And they put away the 
strange gods from among them, and 
served the LORD; and His soul was 
grieved for the misery of Israel. 

17Then the children of Ammon were 
gathered together, and encamped in 
Gilead. And the children of Israel 
assembled themselves together, and 
encamped in Mizpah. 18And the 
people, the princes of Gilead, said one 
to another: ‘What man is he that will 
begin to fight against the children of 
Ammon? he shall be head over all the 
inhabitants of Gilead.’ 
10 






Now Jephthah the Gileadite 
was a mighty man of valour, 
and he was the son of a harlot; and 
Gilead begot Jephthah. 2And Gilead’s 
wife bore him sons; and when his 
wife’s sons grew up, they drove out 
Jephthah, and said unto him: ‘Thou 
shalt not inherit in our father’s house; 
for thou art the son of another 
woman.’ 3Then Jephthah fled from his 
brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; 
and there were gathered vain fellows 
to Jephthah, and they went out with 
him. 

4And it came to pass after a while, 
that the children of Ammon made war 
against Israel. 5And it was so, that 
when the children of Ammon made 
war against Israel, the elders of Gilead 
went to fetch Jephthah out of the land 
of Tob. 6And they said unto Jephthah: 
‘Come and be our chief, that we may 
fight with the children of Ammon.’ 
7And Jephthah said unto the elders of 
Gilead: ‘Did not ye hate me, and drive 
me out of my father’s house? and why 
are ye come unto me now when ye are 
in distress?’ 8And the elders of Gilead 
said unto Jephthah: ‘Therefore are we 
returned to thee now, that thou mayest 
go with us, and fight with the children 
of Ammon, and thou shalt be our head 
over all the inhabitants of Gilead.’ 
9And Jephthah said unto the elders of 
Gilead: ‘If ye bring me back home to 
fight with the children of Ammon, and 
the LORD deliver them before me, I will 
be your head.’ 10And the elders of 
Gilead said unto Jephthah: ‘The LORD 
shall be witness between us; surely 
according to thy word so will we do.’ 
11Then Jephthah went with the elders 
of Gilead, and the people made him 
head and chief over them; and 
Jephthah spoke all his words before 
the LORD in Mizpah. 

12And Jephthah sent messengers 
unto the king of the children of 
Ammon, saying: ‘What hast thou to do 
with me, that thou art come unto me to 
fight against my land?’ 13And the king 
of the children of Ammon answered 
unto the messengers of Jephthah: 
‘Because Israel took away my land, 
when he came up out of Egypt, from 
the Arnon even unto the Jabbok, and 
unto the Jordan; now therefore restore 
those cities peaceably.’ 14And 
Jephthah sent messengers again unto 
the king of the children of Ammon; 
15and he said unto him: ‘Thus saith 
Jephthah: Israel took not away the land 
of Moab, nor the land of the children 
of Ammon. 16But when they came up 
from Egypt, and Israel walked through 
the wilderness unto the Red Sea, and 
came to Kadesh; 17then Israel sent 
messengers unto the king of Edom, 
saying: Let me, I pray thee, pass 
through thy land; but the king of Edom 
hearkened not. And in like manner he 
sent unto the king of Moab; but he 
would not; and Israel abode in Kadesh. 
18Then he walked through the 
wilderness, and compassed the land of 
Edom, and the land of Moab, and 
came by the east side of the land of 
Moab, and they pitched on the other 
11 




side of the Arnon; but they came not 
within the border of Moab, for the 
Arnon was the border of Moab. 19And 
Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king 
of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; 
and Israel said unto him: Let us pass, 
we pray thee, through thy land unto 
my place. 20But Sihon trusted not 
Israel to pass through his border; but 
Sihon gathered all his people together, 
and pitched in Jahaz, and fought 
against Israel. 21And the LORD, the God 
of Israel, delivered Sihon and all his 
people into the hand of Israel, and they 
smote them; so Israel possessed all the 
land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of 
that country. 22And they possessed all 
the border of the Amorites, from the 
Arnon even unto the Jabbok, and from 
the wilderness even unto the Jordan. 
23So now the LORD, the God of Israel, 
hath dispossessed the Amorites from 
before His people Israel, and shouldest 
thou possess them? 24Wilt not thou 
possess that which Chemosh thy god 
giveth thee to possess? So 
whomsoever the LORD our God hath 
dispossessed from before us, them will 
we possess. 25And now art thou any 
thing better than Balak the son of 
Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever 
strive against Israel, or did he ever 
fight against them? 26While Israel 
dwelt in Heshbon and its towns, and in 
Aroer and its towns, and in all the 
cities that are along by the side of the 
Arnon, three hundred years; wherefore 
did ye not recover them within that 
time? 27I therefore have not sinned 
against thee, but thou doest me wrong 
to war against me; the LORD, the Judge, 
be judge this day between the children 
of Israel and the children of Ammon.’ 
28Howbeit the king of the children of 
Ammon hearkened not unto the words 
of Jephthah which he sent him. 

29Then the spirit of the LORD came 
upon Jephthah, and he passed over 
Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over 
Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of 
Gilead he passed over unto the 
children of Ammon. 30And Jephthah 
vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said: 
‘If Thou wilt indeed deliver the 
children of Ammon into my hand, 
31then it shall be, that whatsoever 
cometh forth of the doors of my house 
to meet me, when I return in peace 
from the children of Ammon, it shall 
be the LORD’S, and I will offer it up for 
a burnt-offering.’ 32So Jephthah passed 
over unto the children of Ammon to 
fight against them; and the LORD 
delivered them into his hand. 33And he 
smote them from Aroer until thou 
come to Minnith, even twenty cities, 
and unto Abel-cheramim, with a very 
great slaughter. So the children of 
Ammon were subdued before the 
children of Israel. 

34And Jephthah came to Mizpah 
unto his house, and, behold, his 
daughter came out to meet him with 
timbrels and with dances; and she was 
his only child; beside her he had 
neither son nor daughter. 35And it 
came to pass, when he saw her, that he 
rent his clothes, and said: ‘Alas, my 


daughter! thou hast brought me very 
low, and thou art become my troubler; 
for I have opened my mouth unto the 
LORD, and I cannot go back.’ 36And she 
said unto him: ‘My father, thou hast 
opened thy mouth unto the LORD; do 
unto me according to that which hath 
proceeded out of thy mouth; 
forasmuch as the LORD hath taken 
vengeance for thee of thine enemies, 
even of the children of Ammon.’ 
37And she said unto her father: ‘Let 
this thing be done for me: let me alone 
two months, that I may depart and go 
down upon the mountains, and bewail 
my virginity, I and my companions.’ 
38And he said: ‘Go.’ And he sent her 
away for two months; and she 
departed, she and her companions, and 
bewailed her virginity upon the 
mountains. 39And it came to pass at the 
end of two months, that she returned 
unto her father, who did with her 
according to his vow which he had 
vowed; and she had not known man. 
And it was a custom in Israel, 40that 
the daughters of Israel went yearly to 
lament the daughter of Jephthah the 
Gileadite four days in a year. 

And the men of Ephraim were 
gathered together, and passed 
to Zaphon; and they said unto 
Jephthah: ‘Wherefore didst thou pass 
over to fight against the children of 
Ammon, and didst not call us to go 
with thee? we will burn thy house 
upon thee with fire.’ 2And Jephthah 
said unto them: ‘I and my people were 
at great strife with the children of 
Ammon; and when I called you, ye 
saved me not out of their hand. 3And 
when I saw that ye saved me not, I put 
my life in my hand, and passed over 
against the children of Ammon, and 
the LORD delivered them into my hand; 
wherefore then are ye come up unto 
me this day, to fight against me?’ 
4Then Jephthah gathered together all 
the men of Gilead, and fought with 
Ephraim; and the men of Gilead smote 
Ephraim, because they said: ‘Ye are 
fugitives of Ephraim, ye Gileadites, in 
the midst of Ephraim, and in the midst 
of Manasseh.’ 5And the Gileadites 
took the fords of the Jordan against the 
Ephraimites; and it was so, that when 
any of the fugitives of Ephraim said: 
‘Let me go over, ‘the men of Gilead 
said unto him: ‘Art thou an 
Ephraimite?’ If he said: ‘Nay’; 6then 
said they unto him: ‘Say now 
Shibboleth’; and he said ‘Sibboleth’; 
for he could not frame to pronounce it 
right; then they laid hold on him, and 
slew him at the fords of the Jordan; 
and there fell at that time of Ephraim 
forty and two thousand. 

7And Jephthah judged Israel six 
years. Then died Jephthah the 
Gileadite, and was buried in one of the 
cities of Gilead. 

8And after him Ibzan of Beth-lehem 
judged Israel. 9And he had thirty sons, 
and thirty daughters he sent abroad, 
and thirty daughters he brought in 
from abroad for his sons. And he 
judged Israel seven years. 10and Ibzan 
died, and was buried at Beth-lehem. 
12 




11And after him Elon the Zebulunite 
judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten 
years. 12And Elon the Zebulunite died, 
and was buried in Aijalon in the land 
of Zebulun. 

13And after him Abdon the son of 
Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel. 
14And he had forty sons and thirty 
sons’sons, that rode on threescore and 
ten ass colts; and he judged Israel eight 
years. 15And Abdon the son of Hillel 
the Pirathonite died, and was buried in 
Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the 
hill-country of the Amalekites. 

And the children of Israel 
again did that which was evil 
in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD 
delivered them into the hand of the 
Philistines forty years. 

2And there was a certain man of 
Zorah, of the family of the Danites, 
whose name was Manoah; and his 
wife was barren, and bore not. 3And 
the angel of the LORD appeared unto 
the woman, and said unto her: ‘Behold 
now, thou art barren, and hast not 
borne; but thou shalt conceive, and 
bear a son. 4Now therefore beware, I 
pray thee, and drink no wine nor 
strong drink, and eat not any unclean 
thing. 5For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and 
bear a son; and no razor shall come 
upon his head; for the child shall be a 
Nazirite unto God from the womb; and 
he shall begin to save Israel out of the 
hand of the Philistines.’ 6Then the 
woman came and told her husband, 
saying: ‘A man of God came unto me, 
and his countenance was like the 
countenance of the angel of God, very 
terrible; and I asked him not whence 
he was, neither told he me his name; 
7but he said unto me: Behold, thou 
shalt conceive, and bear a son; and 
now drink no wine nor strong drink, 
and eat not any unclean thing; for the 
child shall be a Nazirite unto God from 
the womb to the day of his death.’ 

8Then Manoah entreated the LORD, 
and said: ‘Oh, LORD, I pray Thee, let 
the man of God whom Thou didst send 
come again unto us, and teach us what 
we shall do unto the child that shall be 
born.’ 9And God hearkened to the 
voice of Manoah; and the angel of God 
came again unto the woman as she sat 
in the field; but Manoah her husband 
was not with her. 10And the woman 
made haste, and ran, and told her 
husband, and said unto him: ‘Behold, 
the man hath appeared unto me, that 
came unto me that day.’ 11And 
Manoah arose, and went after his wife, 
and came to the man, and said unto 
him: ‘Art thou the man that spokest 
unto the woman?’ And he said: ‘I am.’ 
12And Manoah said: ‘Now when thy 
word cometh to pass, what shall be the 
rule for the child, and what shall be 
done with him?’ 13And the angel of the 
LORD said unto Manoah: ‘Of all that I 
said unto the woman let her beware. 
14She may not eat of any thing that 
cometh of the grapevine, neither let 
her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat 
any unclean thing; all that I 
commanded her let her observe.’ 
15And Manoah said unto the angel of 
13 




the LORD: ‘I pray thee, let us detain 
thee, that we may make ready a kid for 
thee.’ 16And the angel of the LORD said 
unto Manoah: ‘Though thou detain 
me, I will not eat of thy bread; and if 
thou wilt make ready a burnt-offering, 
thou must offer it unto the LORD.’ For 
Manoah knew not that he was the 
angel of the LORD. 17And Manoah said 
unto the angel of the LORD: ‘What is 
thy name, that when thy words come 
to pass we may do thee honour?’ 
18And the angel of the LORD said unto 
him: ‘Wherefore askest thou after my 
name, seeing it is hidden?’ 19So 
Manoah took the kid with the meal-
offering, and offered it upon the rock 
unto the LORD; and [the angel] did 
wondrously, and Manoah and his wife 
looked on. 20For it came to pass, when 
the flame went up toward heaven from 
off the altar, that the angel of the LORD 
ascended in the flame of the altar; and 
Manoah and his wife looked on; and 
they fell on their faces to the ground. 
21But the angel of the LORD did no 
more appear to Manoah or to his wife. 
Then Manoah knew that he was the 
angel of the LORD. 22And Manoah said 
unto his wife: ‘We shall surely die, 
because we have seen God.’ 23But his 
wife said unto him: ‘If the LORD were 
pleased to kill us, He would not have 
received a burnt-offering and a meal-
offering at our hand, neither would He 
have shown us all these things, nor 
would at this time have told such 
things as these.’ 

24And the woman bore a son, and 
called his name Samson; and the child 
grew, and the LORD blessed him. 25And 
the spirit of the LORD began to move 
him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah 
and Eshtaol. 

And Samson went down to 
Timnah, and saw a woman in 
Timnah of the daughters of the 
Philistines. 2And he came up, and told 
his father and his mother, and said: ‘I 
have seen a woman in Timnah of the 
daughters of the Philistines; now 
therefore get her for me to wife.’ 
3Then his father and his mother said 
unto him: ‘Is there never a woman 
among the daughters of thy brethren, 
or among all my people, that thou 
goest to take a wife of the 
uncircumcised Philistines?’ And 
Samson said unto his father: ‘Get her 
for me; for she pleaseth me well.’ 4But 
his father and his mother knew not that 
it was of the LORD; for he sought an 
occasion against the Philistines. Now 
at that time the Philistines had rule 
over Israel. 

5Then went Samson down, and his 
father and his mother, to Timnah, and 
came to the vineyards of Timnah; and, 
behold, a young lion roared against 
him. 6And the spirit of the LORD came 
mightily upon him, and he rent him as 
one would have rent a kid, and he had 
nothing in his hand; but he told not his 
father or his mother what he had done. 
7And he went down, and talked with 
the woman; and she pleased Samson 
well. 8And after a while he returned to 
14 




take her, and he turned aside to see the 
carcass of the lion; and, behold, there 
was a swarm of bees in the body of the 
lion, and honey. 9And he scraped it out 
into his hands, and went on, eating as 
he went, and he came to his father and 
mother, and gave unto them, and they 
did eat; but he told them not that he 
had scraped the honey out of the body 
of the lion. 10And his father went down 
unto the woman; and Samson made 
there a feast; for so used the young 
men to do. 11And it came to pass, when 
they saw him, that they brought thirty 
companions to be with him. 12And 
Samson said unto them: ‘Let me now 
put forth a riddle unto you; if ye can 
declare it me within the seven days of 
the feast, and find it out, then I will 
give you thirty linen garments and 
thirty changes of raiment; 13but if ye 
cannot declare it me, then shall ye give 
me thirty linen garments and thirty 
changes of raiment.’ And they said 
unto him: ‘Put forth thy riddle, that we 
may hear it.’ 14And he said unto them: 

Out of the eater came forth food, 

And out of the strong came forth 
sweetness. 

And they could not in three days 
declare the riddle. 15And it came to 
pass on the seventh day, that they said 
unto Samson’s wife: ‘Entice thy 
husband, that he may declare unto us 
the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy 
father’s house with fire; have ye called 
us hither to impoverish us?’ 16And 
Samson’s wife wept before him, and 
said: ‘Thou dost but hate me, and 
lovest me not; thou hast put forth a 
riddle unto the children of my people, 
and wilt thou not tell it me?’ And he 
said unto her: ‘Behold, I have not told 
it my father nor my mother, and shall I 
tell thee?’ 17And she wept before him 
the seven days, while their feast lasted; 
and it came to pass on the seventh day, 
that he told her, because she pressed 
him sore; and she told the riddle to the 
children of her people. 18And the men 
of the city said unto him on the 
seventh day before the sun went down: 

What is sweeter than honey? 

And what is stronger than a lion? 

And he said unto them: 

If ye had not plowed with my heifer, 

Ye had not found out my riddle. 

19And the spirit of the LORD came 
mightily upon him, and he went down 
to Ashkelon, and smote thirty men of 
them, and took their spoil, and gave 
the changes of raiment unto them that 
declared the riddle. And his anger was 
kindled, and he went up to his father’s 
house. 20But Samson’s wife was given 
to his companion, whom he had had 
for his friend. 

But it came to pass after a 
while, in the time of wheat 
harvest, that Samson visited his wife 
with a kid; and he said: ‘I will go in to 
my wife into the chamber.’ But her 
father would not suffer him to go in. 
2And her father said: ‘I verily thought 
that thou hadst utterly hated her; 
therefore I gave her to thy companion; 
is not her younger sister fairer than 
she? take her, I pray thee, instead of 
15 




her.’ 3And Samson said unto them: 
‘This time shall I be quits with the 
Philistines, when I do them a 
mischief.’ 4And Samson went and 
caught three hundred foxes, and took 
torches, and turned tail to tail, and put 
a torch in the midst between every two 
tails. 5And when he had set the torches 
on fire, he let them go into the 
standing corn of the Philistines, and 
burnt up both the shocks and the 
standing corn, and also the oliveyards. 
6Then the Philistines said: ‘Who hath 
done this?’ And they said: ‘Samson, 
the son-in-law of the Timnite, because 
he hath taken his wife, and given her 
to his companion.’ And the Philistines 
came up, and burnt her and her father 
with fire. 7And Samson said unto 
them: ‘If ye do after this manner, 
surely I will be avenged of you, and 
after that I will cease.’ 8And he smote 
them hip and thigh with a great 
slaughter; and he went down and dwelt 
in the cleft of the rock of Etam. 

9Then the Philistines went up, and 
pitched in Judah, and spread 
themselves against Lehi. 10And the 
men of Judah said: ‘Why are ye come 
up against us?’ And they said: ‘To 
bind Samson are we come up, to do to 
him as he hath done to us.’ 11Then 
three thousand men of Judah went 
down to the cleft of the rock of Etam, 
and said to Samson: ‘Knowest thou 
not that the Philistines are rulers over 
us? what then is this that thou hast 
done unto us?’ And he said unto them: 
‘As they did unto me, so have I done 
unto them.’ 12And they said unto him: 
‘We are come down to bind thee, that 
we may deliver thee into the hand of 
the Philistines.’ And Samson said unto 
them: ‘Swear unto me, that ye will not 
fall upon me yourselves.’ 13And they 
spoke unto him, saying: ‘No; but we 
will bind thee fast, and deliver thee 
into their hand; but surely we will not 
kill thee.’ And they bound him with 
two new ropes, and brought him up 
from the rock. 14When he came unto 
Lehi, the Philistines shouted as they 
met him; and the spirit of the LORD 
came mightily upon him, and the ropes 
that were upon his arms became as 
flax that was burnt with fire, and his 
bands dropped from off his hands. 
15And he found a new jawbone of an 
ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, 
and smote a thousand men therewith. 
16And Samson said: 

With the jawbone of an ass, heaps 
upon heaps, 

With the jawbone of an ass have I 
smitten a thousand men. 

17And it came to pass, when he had 
made an end of speaking, that he cast 
away the jawbone out of his hand; and 
that place was called aRamath-lehi. 
18And he was sore athirst, and called 
on the LORD, and said: ‘Thou hast 
given this great deliverance by the 
hand of Thy servant; and now shall I 
die for thirst, and fall into the hand of 
the uncircumcised?’ 19But God cleaved 
the hollow place that is in Lehi, and 

a That is, The hill of the jawbone. 


there came water thereout; and when 
he had drunk, his spirit came back, and 
he revived; wherefore the name 
thereof was called aEn-hakkore, which 
is in Lehi unto this day. 20And he 
judged Israel in the days of the 
Philistines twenty years. 

a That is, The spring of him that 
called. 

And Samson went to Gaza, 
and saw there a harlot, and 
went in unto her. 2[And it was told] the 
Gazites, saying: ‘Samson is come 
hither.’ And they compassed him in, 
and lay in wait for him all night in the 
gate of the city, and were quiet all the 
night, saying: ‘Let be till morning 
light, then we will kill him.’ 3And 
Samson lay till midnight, and arose at 
midnight, and laid hold of the doors of 
the gate of the city, and the two posts, 
and plucked them up, bar and all, and 
put them upon his shoulders, and 
carried them up to the top of the 
mountain that is before Hebron. 

4And it came to pass afterward, that 
he loved a woman in the valley of 
Sorek, whose name was Delilah. 5And 
the lords of the Philistines came up 
unto her, and said unto her: ‘Entice 
him, and see wherein his great strength 
lieth, and by what means we may 
prevail against him, that we may bind 
him to afflict him; and we will give 
thee every one of us eleven hundred 
pieces of silver.’ 6And Delilah said to 
Samson: ‘Tell me, I pray thee, wherein 
thy great strength lieth, and wherewith 

thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.’ 
7And Samson said unto her: ‘If they 
bind me with seven fresh bowstrings 
that were never dried, then shall I 
become weak, and be as any other 
man.’ 8Then the lords of the Philistines 
brought up to her seven fresh 
bowstrings which had not been dried, 
and she bound him with them. 9Now 
she had liers-in-wait abiding in the 
inner chamber. And she said unto him: 
‘The Philistines are upon thee, 
Samson.’ And he broke the bowstrings 
as a string of tow is broken when it 
toucheth the fire. So his strength was 
not known. 10And Delilah said unto 
Samson: ‘Behold, thou hast mocked 
me, and told me lies; now tell me, I 
pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be 
bound.’ 11And he said unto her: ‘If 
they only bind me with new ropes 
wherewith no work, hath been done, 
then shall I become weak, and be as 
any other man.’ 12So Delilah took new 
ropes, and bound him therewith, and 
said unto him: ‘The Philistines are 
upon thee, Samson.’ And the liers-in-
wait were abiding in the inner 
chamber. And he broke them from off 
his arms like a thread. 13And Delilah 
said unto Samson: ‘Hitherto thou hast 
mocked me, and told me lies; tell me 
wherewith thou mightest be bound.’ 
And he said unto her: ‘If thou weavest 
the seven locks of my head with the 
web.’ 14And she fastened it with the 
pin, and said unto him: ‘The 
Philistines are upon thee, Samson.’ 
And he awoke out of his sleep, and 
16 




plucked away the pin of the beam, and 
the web. 15And she said unto him: 
‘How canst thou say: I love thee, when 
thy heart is not with me? thou hast 
mocked me these three times, and hast 
not told me wherein thy great strength 
lieth.’ 16And it came to pass, when she 
pressed him daily with her words, and 
urged him, that his soul was vexed 
unto death. 17And he told her all his 
heart, and said unto her: ‘There hath 
not come a razor upon my head; for I 
have been a Nazirite unto God from 
my mother’s womb; if I be shaven, 
then my strength will go from me, and 
I shall become weak, and be like any 
other man.’ 18And when Delilah saw 
that he had told her all his heart, she 
sent and called for the lords of the 
Philistines, saying: ‘Come up this 
once, for he hath told me all his heart.’ 
Then the lords of the Philistines came 
up unto her, and brought the money in 
their hand. 19And she made him sleep 
upon her knees; and she called for a 
man, and had the seven locks of his 
head shaven off; and she began to 
afflict him, and his strength went from 
him. 20And she said: ‘The Philistines 
are upon thee, Samson.’ And he awoke 
out of his sleep, and said: ‘I will go out 
as at other times, and shake myself.’ 
But he knew not that the LORD was 
departed from him. 21And the 
Philistines laid hold on him, and put 
out his eyes; and they brought him 
down to Gaza, and bound him with 
fetters of brass; and he did grind in the 
prison-house. 22Howbeit the hair of his 
head began to grow again after he was 
shaven. 

23And the lords of the Philistines 
gathered them together to offer a great 
sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to 
rejoice; for they said: ‘Our god hath 
delivered Samson our enemy into our 
hand.’ 24And when the people saw 
him, they praised their god; for they 
said: ‘Our god hath delivered into our 
hand our enemy, and the destroyer of 
our country, who hath slain many of 
us.’ 25And it came to pass, when their 
hearts were merry, that they said: ‘Call 
for Samson, that he may make us 
sport.’ And they called for Samson out 
of the prison-house; and he made sport 
before them; and they set him between 
the pillars. 26And Samson said unto the 
lad that held him by the hand: ‘Suffer 
me that I may feel the pillars 
whereupon the house resteth, that I 
may lean upon them.’ 27Now the house 
was full of men and women; and all 
the lords of the Philistines were there; 
and there were upon the roof about 
three thousand men and women, that 
beheld while Samson made sport. 
28And Samson called unto the LORD, 
and said: ‘O Lord GOD, remember me, 
I pray Thee, and strengthen me, I pray 
Thee, only this once, O God, that I 
may be this once avenged of the 
Philistines for my two eyes.’ 29And 
Samson took fast hold of the two 
middle pillars upon which the house 
rested, and leaned upon them, the one 
with his right hand, and the other with 
his left. 30And Samson said: ‘Let me 


die with the Philistines.’ And he bent 
with all his might; and the house fell 
upon the lords, and upon all the people 
that were therein. So the dead that he 
slew at his death were more than they 
that he slew in his life. 31Then his 
brethren and all the house of his father 
came down, and took him, and brought 
him up, and buried him between Zorah 
and Eshtaol in the burying-place of 
Manoah his father. And he judged 
Israel twenty years. 

Now there was a man of the 
hill-country of Ephraim, 
whose name was Micah. 2And he said 
unto his mother: ‘The eleven hundred 
pieces of silver that were taken from 
thee, about which thou didst utter a 
curse, and didst also speak it in mine 
ears, behold, the silver is with me; I 
took it.’ And his mother said: ‘Blessed 
be my son of the LORD.’ 3And he 
restored the eleven hundred pieces of 
silver to his mother, and his mother 
said: ‘I verily dedicate the silver unto 
the LORD from my hand for my son, to 
make a graven image and a molten 
image; now therefore I will restore it 
unto thee.’ 4And when he restored the 
money unto his mother, his mother 
took two hundred pieces of silver, and 
gave them to the founder, who made 
thereof a graven image and a molten 
image; and it was in the house of 
Micah. 5And the man Micah had a 
house of God, and he made an ephod, 
and teraphim, and consecrated one of 
his sons, who became his priest. 6In 
those days there was no king in Israel; 
every man did that which was right in 
his own eyes. 7And there was a young 
man out of Beth-lehem in Judah—in 
the family of Judah—who was a 
Levite, and he sojourned there. 8And 
the man departed out of the city, out of 
Beth-lehem in Judah, to sojourn where 
he could find a place; and he came to 
the hill-country of Ephraim to the 
house of Micah, as he journeyed. 9And 
Micah said unto him: ‘Whence comest 
thou?’ And he said unto him: ‘I am a 
Levite of Beth-lehem in Judah, and I 
go to sojourn where I may find a 
place.’ 10And Micah said unto him: 
‘Dwell with me, and be unto me a 
father and a priest, and I will give thee 
ten pieces of silver by the year, and a 
suit of apparel, and thy victuals.’ So 
the Levite went in. 11And the Levite 
was content to dwell with the man; and 
the young man was unto him as one of 
his sons. 12And Micah consecrated the 
Levite, and the young man became his 
priest, and was in the house of Micah. 
13Then said Micah: ‘Now know I that 
the LORD will do me good, seeing I 
have a Levite as my priest.’ 

In those days there was no 
king in Israel; and in those 
days the tribe of the Danites sought 
them an inheritance to dwell in; for 
unto that day there had nothing been 
allotted unto them among the tribes of 
Israel for an inheritance. 2And the 
children of Dan sent of their family 
five men from their whole number, 
men of valour, from Zorah, and from 
Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to 
17 

18 




search it; and they said unto them: 
‘Go, search the land’; and they came 
to the hill-country of Ephraim, unto 
the house of Micah, and lodged there. 
3When they were by the house of 
Micah, they knew the voice of the 
young man the Levite; and they turned 
aside thither, and said unto him: ‘Who 
brought thee hither? and what doest 
thou in this place? and what hast thou 
here?’ 4And he said unto them: ‘Thus 
and thus hath Micah dealt with me, 
and he hath hired me, and I am 
become his priest.’ 5And they said 
unto him: ‘Ask counsel, we pray thee, 
of God, that we may know whether 
our way which we are going shall be 
prosperous.’ 6And the priest said unto 
them: ‘Go in peace; before the LORD is 
your way wherein ye go.’ 

7Then the five men departed, and 
came to Laish, and saw the people that 
were therein, how they dwelt in 
security, after the manner of the 
Zidonians, quiet and secure; for there 
was none in the land, possessing 
authority, that might put them to 
shame in any thing, and they were far 
from the Zidonians, and had no 
dealings with any man. 8And they 
came unto their brethren to Zorah and 
Eshtaol; and their brethren said unto 
them: ‘What say ye?’ 9And they said: 
‘Arise, and let us go up against them; 
for we have seen the land, and, behold, 
it is very good; and are ye still? be not 
slothful to go and to enter in to possess 
the land. 10When ye go, ye shall come 
unto a people secure, and the land is 
large; for God hath given it into your 
hand; a place where there is no want; it 
hath every thing that is in the earth.’ 

11And there set forth from thence of 
the family of the Danites, out of Zorah 
and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men 
girt with weapons of war. 12And they 
went up, and encamped in Kiriath-
jearim, in Judah; wherefore that place 
was called Mahaneh-dan unto this day; 
behold, it is behind Kiriath-jearim. 
13And they passed thence unto the hill-
country of Ephraim, and came unto the 
house of Micah. 14Then answered the 
five men that went to spy out the 
country of Laish, and said unto their 
brethren: ‘Do ye know that there is in 
these houses an ephod, and teraphim, 
and a graven image, and a molten 
image? now therefore consider what 
ye have to do.’ 15And they turned aside 
thither, and came to the house of the 
young man the Levite, even unto the 
house of Micah, and asked him of his 
welfare. 16And the six hundred men 
girt with their weapons of war, who 
were of the children of Dan, stood by 
the entrance of the gate. 17And the five 
men that went to spy out the land went 
up, and came in thither, and took the 
graven image, and the ephod, and the 
teraphim, and the molten image; and 
the priest stood by the entrance of the 
gate with the six hundred men girt 
with weapons of war. 18And when 
these went into Micah’s house, and 
fetched the graven image of the ephod, 
and the teraphim, and the molten 
image, the priest said unto them: 


‘What do ye?’ 19And they said unto 
him: ‘Hold thy peace, lay thy hand 
upon thy mouth, and go with us, and 
be to us a father and a priest; is it 
better for thee to be priest unto the 
house of one man, or to be priest unto 
a tribe and a family in Israel?’ 20And 
the priest’s heart was glad, and he took 
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the 
graven image, and went in the midst of 
the people. 21So they turned and 
departed, and put the little ones and 
the cattle and the goods before them. 
22When they were a good way from 
the house of Micah, the men that were 
in the houses near to Micah’s house 
were gathered together, and overtook 
the children of Dan. 23And they cried 
unto the children of Dan. And they 
turned their faces, and said unto 
Micah: ‘What aileth thee, that thou 
comest with such a company?’ 24And 
he said: ‘Ye have taken away my god 
which I made, and the priest, and are 
gone away, and what have I more? and 
how then say ye unto me: What aileth 
thee?’ 25And the children of Dan said 
unto him: ‘Let not thy voice be heard 
among us, lest angry fellows fall upon 
you, and thou lose thy life, with the 
lives of thy household.’ 26And the 
children of Dan went their way; and 
when Micah saw that they were too 
strong for him, he turned and went 
back unto his house. 27And they took 
that which Micah had made, and the 
priest whom he had, and came unto 
Laish, unto a people quiet and secure, 
and smote them with the edge of the 
sword; and they burnt the city with 
fire. 28And there was no deliverer, 
because it was far from Zidon, and 
they had no dealings with any man; 
and it was in the valley that lieth by 
Beth-rehob. And they built the city, 
and dwelt therein. 29And they called 
the name of the city Dan, after the 
name of Dan their father, who was 
born unto Israel; howbeit the name of 
the city was Laish at the first. 30And 
the children of Dan set up for 
themselves the graven image; and 
Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son 
of aManasseh, he and his sons were 
priests to the tribe of the Danites until 
the day of the captivity of the land. 
31So they set them up Micah’s graven 
image which he made, all the time that 
the house of God was in Shiloh. 

a Heb. .... With . suspended, 
indicating an earlier reading, Moses. 

 

19 



And it came to pass in those 
days, when there was no king 
in Israel, that there was a certain 
Levite sojourning on the farther side of 
the hill-country of Ephraim, who took 
to him a concubine out of Beth-lehem 
in Judah. 2And his concubine played 
the harlot against him, and went away 
from him unto her father’s house to 
Beth-lehem in Judah, and was there 
the space of four months. 3And her 
husband arose, and went after her, to 
speak kindly unto her, to bring her 
back, having his servant with him, and 


a couple of asses; and she brought him 
into her father’s house; and when the 
father of the damsel saw him, he 
rejoiced to meet him. 4And his father-
in-law, the damsel’s father, retained 
him; and he abode with him three 
days; so they did eat and drink, and 
lodged there. 5And it came to pass on 
the fourth day, that they arose early in 
the morning, and he rose up to depart; 
and the damsel’s father said unto his 
son-in-law: ‘Stay thy heart with a 
morsel of bread, and afterward ye shall 
go your way.’ 6So they sat down, and 
did eat and drink, both of them 
together; and the damsel’s father said 
unto the man: ‘Be content, I pray thee, 
and tarry all night, and let thy heart be 
merry.’ 7And the man rose up to 
depart; but his father-in-law urged 
him, and he lodged there again. 8And 
he arose early in the morning on the 
fifth day to depart; and the damsel’s 
father said: ‘Stay thy heart, I pray thee, 
and tarry ye until the day declineth’; 
and they did eat, both of them. 9And 
when the man rose up to depart, he, 
and his concubine, and his servant, his 
father-in-law, the damsel’s father, said 
unto him: ‘Behold, now the day 
draweth toward evening; tarry, I pray 
you, all night; behold, the day groweth 
to an end; lodge here, that thy heart 
may be merry; and to-morrow get you 
early on your way, that thou mayest go 
home.’ 10But the man would not tarry 
that night, but he rose up and departed, 
and came over against Jebus—the 
same is Jerusalem; and there were with 
him a couple of asses saddled; his 
concubine also was with him. 11When 
they were by Jebus—the day was far 
spent—the servant said unto his 
master: ‘Come, I pray thee, and let us 
turn aside into this city of the 
Jebusites, and lodge in it.’ 12And his 
master said unto him: ‘We will not 
turn aside into the city of a foreigner, 
that is not of the children of Israel; but 
we will pass over to Gibeah.’ 13And he 
said unto his servant: ‘Come and let us 
draw near to one of these places; and 
we will lodge in Gibeah, or in Ramah.’ 
14So they passed on and went their 
way; and the sun went down upon 
them near to Gibeah, which belongeth 
to Benjamin. 15And they turned aside 
thither, to go in to lodge in Gibeah; 
and he went in, and sat him down in 
the broad place of the city; for there 
was no man that took them into his 
house to lodge. 16And, behold, there 
came an old man from his work out of 
the field at even; now the man was of 
the hill-country of Ephraim, and he 
sojourned in Gibeah; but the men of 
the place were Benjamites. 17And he 
lifted up his eyes, and saw the 
wayfaring man in the broad place of 
the city; and the old man said: 
‘Whither goest thou? and whence 
comest thou?’ 18And he said unto him: 
‘We are passing from Beth-lehem in 
Judah unto the farther side of the hill-
country of Ephraim; from thence am I, 
and I went to Beth-lehem in Judah, 
and I am now going to the house of the 
LORD; and there is no man that taketh 


me into his house. 19Yet there is both 
straw and provender for our asses; and 
there is bread and wine also for me, 
and for thy handmaid, and for the 
young man that is with thy servants; 
there is no want of any thing.’ 20And 
the old man said: ‘Peace be unto thee; 
howsoever let all thy wants lie upon 
me; only lodge not in the broad place.’ 
21So he brought him into his house, 
and gave the asses fodder; and they 
washed their feet, and did eat and 
drink. 22As they were making their 
hearts merry, behold, the men of the 
city, certain base fellows, beset the 
house round about, beating at the door; 
and they spoke to the master of the 
house, the old man, saying: ‘Bring 
forth the man that came into thy house, 
that we may know him.’ 23And the 
man, the master of the house, went out 
unto them, and said unto them: ‘Nay, 
my brethren, I pray you, do not so 
wickedly; seeing that this man is come 
into my house, do not this wanton 
deed. 24Behold, here is my daughter a 
virgin, and his concubine; I will bring 
them out now, and humble ye them, 
and do with them what seemeth good 
unto you; but unto this man do not so 
wanton a thing.’ 25But the men would 
not hearken to him; so the man laid 
hold on his concubine, and brought her 
forth unto them; and they knew her, 
and abused her all the night until the 
morning; and when the day began to 
spring, they let her go. 26Then came 
the woman in the dawning of the day, 
and fell down at the door of the man’s 
house where her lord was, till it was 
light. 27And her lord rose up in the 
morning, and opened the doors of the 
house, and went out to go his way; 
and, behold, the woman his concubine 
was fallen down at the door of the 
house, with her hands upon the 
threshold. 28And he said unto her.’ Up, 
and let us be going’; but none 
answered; then he took her up upon 
the ass; and the man rose up, and got 
him unto his place. 29And when he was 
come into his house, he took a knife, 
and laid hold on his concubine, and 
divided her, limb by limb, into twelve 
pieces, and sent her throughout all the 
borders of Israel. 30And it was so, that 
all that saw it said: ‘Such a thing hath 
not happened nor been seen from the 
day that the children of Israel came up 
out of the land of Egypt unto this day; 
consider it, take counsel, and speak.’ 

Then all the children of Israel 
went out, and the congregation 
was assembled as one man, from Dan 
even to Beer-sheba, with the land of 
Gilead, unto the LORD at Mizpah. 2And 
the chiefs of all the people, even of all 
the tribes of Israel, presented 
themselves in the assembly of the 
people of God, four hundred thousand 
footmen that drew sword.— 3Now the 
children of Benjamin heard that the 
children of Israel were gone up to 
Mizpah.—And the children of Israel 
said: ‘Tell us, how was this 
wickedness brought to pass?’ 4And the 
Levite, the husband of the woman that 
was murdered, answered and said: ‘I 
20 




came into Gibeah that belongeth to 
Benjamin, I and my concubine, to 
lodge. 5And the men of Gibeah rose 
against me, and beset the house round 
about upon me by night; me they 
thought to have slain, and my 
concubine they forced, and she is 
dead. 6And I took my concubine, and 
cut her in pieces, and sent her 
throughout all the country of the 
inheritance of Israel; for they have 
committed lewdness and wantonness 
in Israel 7Behold, ye are all here, 
children of Israel, give here your 
advice and council.’ 8And all the 
people arose as one man, saying: ‘We 
will not any of us go to his tent, 
neither will we any of us turn unto his 
house. 9But now this is the thing which 
we will do to Gibeah: we will go up 
against it by lot; 10and we will take ten 
men of a hundred throughout all the 
tribes of Israel, and a hundred of a 
thousand, and a thousand out of ten 
thousand, to fetch victuals for the 
people, that they may do, when they 
come to aGibeah of Benjamin, 
according to all the wantonness that 
they have wrought in Israel.’ 11So all 
the men of Israel were gathered 
against the city, knit together as one 
man. 

a Heb. Geba. 

12And the tribes of Israel sent men 
through all the tribe of Benjamin, 
saying: ‘What wickedness is this that 
is come to pass among you? 13Now 
therefore deliver up the men, the base 

fellows that are in Gibeah, that we 
may put them to death, and put away 
evil from Israel.’ But the children of 
Benjamin would not hearken to the 
voice of their brethren the children of 
Israel. 14And the children of Benjamin 
gathered themselves together out of 
their cities unto Gibeah, to go out to 
battle against the children of Israel. 
15And the children of Benjamin 
numbered on that day out of the cities 
twenty and six thousand men that drew 
sword, besides the inhabitants of 
Gibeah, who numbered seven hundred 
chosen men. 16All this people, even 
seven hundred chosen men, were left-
handed; every one could sling stones 
at a hair-breadth, and not miss. 

17And the men of Israel, beside 
Benjamin, numbered four hundred 
thousand men that drew sword; all 
these were men of war. 18And the 
children of Israel arose, and went up to 
Beth-el, and asked counsel of God; 
and they said: ‘Who shall go up for us 
first to battle against the children of 
Benjamin?’ And the LORD said: ‘Judah 
first.’ 19And the children of Israel rose 
up in the morning, and encamped 
against Gibeah. 20And the men of 
Israel went out to battle against 
Benjamin; and the men of Israel set the 
battle in array against them at Gibeah. 
21And the children of Benjamin came 
forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed 
down to the ground of the Israelites on 
that day twenty and two thousand men. 
22And the people, the men of Israel, 
encouraged themselves, and set the 


battle again in array in the place where 
they set themselves in array the first 
day. 23And the children of Israel went 
up and wept before the LORD until 
even; and they asked of the LORD, 
saying: ‘Shall I again draw nigh to 
battle against the children of Benjamin 
my brother?’ And the LORD said: ‘Go 
up against him.’ 

24And the children of Israel came 
near against the children of Benjamin 
the second day. 25And Benjamin went 
forth against them out of Gibeah the 
second day, and destroyed down to the 
ground of the children of Israel again 
eighteen thousand men; all these drew 
the sword. 26Then all the children of 
Israel, and all the people, went up, and 
came unto Beth-el, and wept, and sat 
there before the LORD, and fasted that 
day until even; and they offered burnt-
offerings and peace-offerings before 
the LORD. 27And the children of Israel 
asked of the LORD—for the ark of the 
covenant of God was there in those 
days, 28and Phinehas, the son of 
Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before 
it in those days—saying: ‘Shall I yet 
again go out to battle against the 
children of Benjamin my brother, or 
shall I cease?’ And the LORD said: ‘Go 
up; for to-morrow I will deliver him 
into thy hand.’ 29And Israel set liers-
in-wait against Gibeah round about. 

30And the children of Israel went up 
against the children of Benjamin on 
the third day, and set themselves in 
array against Gibeah, as at other times. 
31And the children of Benjamin went 
out against the people, and were drawn 
away from the city; and they began to 
smite and kill of the people, as at other 
times, in the field, in the highways, of 
which one goeth up to Beth-el, and the 
other to Gibeah, about thirty men of 
Israel. 32And the children of Benjamin 
said: ‘They are smitten down before 
us, as at the first.’ But the children of 
Israel said: ‘Let us flee, and draw them 
away from the city unto the highways.’ 
33And all the men of Israel rose up out 
of their place, and set themselves in 
array at Baal-tamar; and the liers-in-
wait of Israel broke forth out of their 
place, even out of Maareh-geba. 34And 
there came over against Gibeah ten 
thousand chosen men out of all Israel, 
and the battle was sore; but they knew 
not that evil was close upon them. 
35And the LORD smote Benjamin before 
Israel; and the children of Israel 
destroyed of Benjamin that day twenty 
and five thousand and a hundred men; 
all these drew the sword. 

36So the children of Benjamin saw 
that they were smitten. And the men of 
Israel gave place to Benjamin, because 
they trusted unto the liers-in-wait 
whom they had set against Gibeah.— 
37And the liers-in-wait hastened, and 
rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers-in-
wait drew forth, and smote all the city 
with the edge of the sword. 38Now 
there was an appointed sign between 
the men of Israel and the liers-in-wait, 
that they should make a great beacon 
of smoke rise up out of the city.— 
39And the men of Israel turned in the 


battle, and Benjamin began to smite 
and kill of the men of Israel about 
thirty persons; for they said: ‘Surely 
they are smitten down before us, as in 
the first battle.’ 40But when the beacon 
began to arise up out of the city in a 
pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked 
behind them, and, behold, the whole of 
the city went up in smoke to heaven. 
41And the men of Israel turned, and the 
men of Benjamin were amazed; for 
they saw that evil was come upon 
them. 42Therefore they turned their 
backs before the men of Israel unto the 
way of the wilderness; but the battle 
followed hard after them; and they that 
came out of the city destroyed them in 
the midst of the men of Israel. 43They 
inclosed the Benjamites round about, 
and chased them, and overtook them at 
their resting-place, as far as over 
against Gibeah toward the sunrising. 
44And there fell of Benjamin eighteen 
thousand men; all these were men of 
valour. 45And they turned and fled 
toward the wilderness unto the rock of 
Rimmon; and they gleaned of them in 
the highways five thousand men; and 
followed hard after them unto Gidom, 
and smote of them two thousand men. 
46So that all who fell that day of 
Benjamin were twenty and five 
thousand men that drew the sword; all 
these were men of valour. 47But six 
hundred men turned and fled toward 
the wilderness unto the rock of 
Rimmon, and abode in the rock of 
Rimmon four months. 48And the men 
of Israel turned back upon the children 
of Benjamin, and smote them with the 
edge of the sword, both the entire city, 
and the cattle, and all that they found; 
moreover all the cities which they 
found they set on fire. 

Now the men of Israel had 
sworn in Mizpah, saying: 
‘There shall not any of us give his 
daughter unto Benjamin to wife.’ 2And 
the people came to Beth-el, and sat 
there till even before God, and lifted 
up their voices, and wept sore. 3And 
they said: ‘O LORD, the God of Israel, 
why is this come to pass in Israel, that 
there should be to-day one tribe 
lacking in Israel?’ 4And it came to pass 
on the morrow that the people rose 
early, and built there an altar, and 
offered burnt-offerings and peace-
offerings. 5And the children of Israel 
said: ‘Who is there among all the 
tribes of Israel that came not up in the 
assembly unto the LORD?’ For they had 
made a great oath concerning him that 
came not up unto the LORD to Mizpah, 
saying: ‘He shall surely be put to 
death.’ 6And the children of Israel 
repented them for Benjamin their 
brother, and said: ‘There is one tribe 
cut off from Israel this day. 7How shall 
we do for wives for them that remain, 
seeing we have sworn by the LORD that 
we will not give them of our daughters 
to wives?’ 8And they said: ‘What one 
is there of the tribes of Israel that came 
not up unto the LORD to Mizpah?’ And, 
behold, there came none to the camp 
from Jabesh-gilead to the assembly. 
9For when the people were numbered, 
21 




behold, there were none of the 
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there. 
10And the congregation sent thither 
twelve thousand men of the valiantest, 
and commanded them, saying: ‘Go 
and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-
gilead with the edge of the sword, with 
the women and the little ones. 11And 
this is the thing that ye shall do: ye 
shall utterly destroy every male, and 
every woman that hath lain by man.’ 
12And they found among the 
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four 
hundred young virgins, that had not 
known man by lying with him; and 
they brought them unto the camp to 
Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan. 

13And the whole congregation sent 
and spoke to the children of Benjamin 
that were in the rock of Rimmon, and 
proclaimed peace unto them. 14And 
Benjamin returned at that time; and 
they gave them the women whom they 
had saved alive of the women of 
Jabesh-gilead; and yet so they sufficed 
them not. 15And the people repented 
them for Benjamin, because that the 
LORD had made a breach in the tribes 
of Israel. 

16Then the elders of the 
congregation said: ‘How shall we do 
for wives for them that remain, seeing 
the women are destroyed out of 
Benjamin?’ 17And they said: ‘They 
that are escaped must be as an 
inheritance for Benjamin, that a tribe 
be not blotted out from Israel. 
18Howbeit we may not give them 
wives of our daughters.’ For the 
children of Israel had sworn, saying: 
‘Cursed be he that giveth a wife to 
Benjamin.’ 19And they said: ‘Behold, 
there is the feast of the LORD from year 
to year in Shiloh, which is on the north 
of Beth-el, on the east side of the 
highway that goeth up from Beth-el to 
Shechem, and on the south of 
Lebonah.’ 20And they commanded the 
children of Benjamin, saying: ‘Go and 
lie in wait in the vineyards; 21and see, 
and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh 
come out to dance in the dances, then 
come ye out of the vineyards, and 
catch you every man his wife of the 
daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land 
of Benjamin. 22And it shall be, when 
their fathers or their brethren come to 
strive with us, that we will say unto 
them: Grant them graciously unto us; 
because we took not for each man of 
them his wife in battle; neither did ye 
give them unto them, that ye should 
now be guilty.’ 23And the children of 
Benjamin did so, and took them wives, 
according to their number, of them that 
danced, whom they carried off; and 
they went and returned unto their 
inheritance, and built the cities, and 
dwelt in them. 24And the children of 
Israel departed thence at that time, 
every man to his tribe and to his 
family, and they went out from thence 
every man to his inheritance. 25In those 
days there was no king in Israel; every 
man did that which was right in his 
own eyes. 





