SECOND CHRONICLES 

 

AND SOLOMON the son of David 
was strengthened in his kingdom, 
and the LORD his God was with him, 
and magnified him exceedingly. 2And 
Solomon spoke unto all Israel, to the 
captains of thousands and of hundreds, 
and to the judges, and to every prince 
in all Israel, the heads of the 
fathers’houses. 3So Solomon, and all 
the congregation with him, went to the 
high place that was at Gibeon; for 
there was the tent of meeting of God, 
which Moses the servant of the LORD 
had made in the wilderness. 4But the 
ark of God had David brought up from 
Kiriath-jearim to the place that David 
had prepared for it; for he had pitched 
a tent for it at Jerusalem. 5Moreover 
the brazen altar, that Bezalel the son of 
Uri, the son of Hur, had made, had 
been put before the tabernacle of the 
LORD; and Solomon and the 
congregation sought unto it. 6And 
Solomon offered there, upon the 
brazen altar before the LORD, which 
was at the tent of meeting, he offered a 
thousand burnt-offerings upon it. 

7In that night did God, appear unto 
Solomon, and said unto him: ‘Ask 
what I shall give thee.’ 8And Solomon 
said unto God: ‘Thou hast shown great 
kindness unto David my father, and 
hast made me king in his stead. 9Now, 
O LORD God, let Thy promise unto 
David my father be established; for 
Thou hast made me king over a people 
like the dust of the earth in multitude. 
10Give me now wisdom and 
knowledge, that I may go out and 
come in before this people; for who 
can judge this Thy people, that is so 
great?’ 11And God said to Solomon: 
‘Because this was in thy heart, and 
thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or 
honour, nor the life of them that hate 
thee, neither yet hast asked long life, 
but hast asked wisdom and knowledge 
for thyself, that thou mayest judge My 
people, over whom I have made thee 
king; 12wisdom and knowledge is 
granted unto thee, and I will give thee 
riches, and wealth, and honour, such as 
none of the kings have had that have 
been before thee, neither shall there 
any after thee have the like.’ 13So 
Solomon came [from his journey] to 
the high place that was at Gibeon, 
from before the tent of meeting, unto 
Jerusalem; and he reigned over Israel. 

14And Solomon gathered chariots 
and horsemen; and he had a thousand 
and four hundred chariots, and twelve 
thousand horsemen, that he placed in 
the chariot cities, and with the king at 
Jerusalem. 15And the king made silver 
and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones, 
and cedars made he to be as the 
sycamore-trees that are in the 
Lowland, for abundance. 16And the 
horses which Solomon had were 
1 




brought out of Egypt; also out of 
Keve, the king’s merchants buying 
them of the men of Keve at a price. 
17And they fetched up, and brought out 
of Egypt a chariot for six hundred 
shekels of silver, and a horse for a 
hundred and fifty; and so for all the 
kings of the Hittites, and the kings of 
Aram, did they bring them out by their 
means. 

18Now Solomon purposed to build a 
house for the name of the LORD, and a 

house for his kingdom. 1And 
Solomon counted out threescore 
and ten thousand men to bear burdens, 
and fourscore thousand men that were 
hewers in the mountains, and three 
thousand and six hundred to oversee 
them. 2And Solomon sent to Huram 
the king of Tyre, saying: ‘As thou 
didst deal with David my father, and 
didst send him cedars to build him a 
house to dwell therein [, even so deal 
with me]. 3Behold, I am about to build 
a house for the name of the LORD my 
God, to dedicate it to Him, and to burn 
before Him incense of sweet spices, 
and for the continual showbread, and 
for the burnt-offerings morning and 
evening, on the sabbaths, and on the 
new moons, and on the appointed 
seasons of the LORD our God. This is 
an ordinance for ever to Israel. 4And 
the house which I build is great; for 
great is our God above all gods. 5But 
who is able to build Him a house, 
seeing the heaven and the heaven of 
heavens cannot contain Him? who am 
I then, that I should build Him a house, 
save only to offer before Him? 6Now 
therefore send me a man skilful to 
work in gold, and in silver, and in 
brass, and in iron, and in purple, and 
crimson, and blue, and that hath skill 
to grave all manner of gravings, to be 
with the skilful men that are with me 
in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom 
David my father did provide. 7Send 
me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and 
sandal-wood, out of Lebanon; for I 
know that thy servants have skill to cut 
timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my 
servants shall be with thy servants, 
8even to prepare me timber in 
abundance; for the house which I am 
about to build shall be great and 
wonderful. 9And, behold, I will give to 
thy servants, the hewers that cut 
timber, twenty thousand measures of 
beaten wheat, and twenty thousand 
measures of barley, and twenty 
thousand baths of wine, and twenty 
thousand baths of oil.’ 

10Then Huram the king of Tyre 
answered in writing, which he sent to 
Solomon: ‘Because the LORD loveth 
His people, He hath made thee king 
over them.’ 11Huram said moreover: 
‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of 
Israel, that made heaven and earth, 
who hath given to David the king a 
wise son, endued with discretion and 
understanding, that should build a 
house for the LORD, and a house for his 
kingdom. 12And now I have sent a 
skilful man, endued with 
understanding, even Huram my master 
craftsman, 13the son of a woman of the 
2 




daughters of Dan, and his father was a 
man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, 
and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, 
and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in 
fine linen, and in crimson; also to 
grave any manner of graving, and to 
devise any device; to do whatever may 
be set before him, with thy skilful 
men, and with the skilful men of my 
lord David thy father. 14Now therefore 
the wheat and the barley, the oil and 
the wine, which my lord hath spoken 
of, let him send unto his servants; 
15and we will cut wood out of 
Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need; 
and we will bring it to thee in floats by 
sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up 
to Jerusalem.’ 

16And Solomon numbered all the 
strangers that were in the land of 
Israel, after the numbering wherewith 
David his father had numbered them; 
and they were found a hundred and 
fifty thousand and three thousand and 
six hundred. 17And he set threescore 
and ten thousand of them to bear 
burdens, and fourscore thousand to be 
hewers in the mountains, and three 
thousand and six hundred overseers to 
set the people at work. 

Then Solomon began to build the 
house of the LORD at Jerusalem in 
mount Moriah, where [the LORD] 
appeared unto David his father; for 
which provision had been made in the 
Place of David, in the threshingfloor of 
Ornan the Jebusite. 2And he began to 
build in the second day of the second 
month, in the fourth year of his reign. 
3Now these are the foundations which 
Solomon laid for the building of the 
house of God. The length by cubits 
after the ancient measure was 
threescore cubits, and the breadth 
twenty cubits. 4And the porch that was 
before [the house], the length of it, 
according to the breadth of the house, 
was twenty cubits, and the height a 
hundred and twenty; and he overlaid it 
within with pure gold. 5And the greater 
house he covered with cypress-wood, 
which he overlaid with fine gold, and 
wrought thereon palm-trees and 
chains. 6And he garnished the house 
with precious stones for beauty; and 
the gold was gold of Parvaim. 7He 
overlaid also the house, the beams, the 
thresholds, and the walls thereof, and 
the doors thereof, with gold; and 
graved cherubim on the walls. 

8And he made the most holy place; 
the length thereof, according to the 
breadth of the house, was twenty 
cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty 
cubits; and he overlaid it with fine 
gold, amounting to six hundred talents. 
9And the weight of the nails was fifty 
shekels of gold. And he overlaid the 
upper chambers with gold. 

10And in the most holy place he 
made two cherubim of image work; 
and they overlaid them with gold. 
11And the wings of the cherubim were 
twenty cubits long: the wing of the one 
cherub was five cubits, reaching to the 
wall of the house; and the other wing 
was likewise five cubits, reaching to 
the wing of the other cherub. 12And the 
3 




wing of the other cherub was five 
cubits, reaching to the wall of the 
house; and the other wing was five 
cubits also, joining to the wing of the 
other cherub. 13The wings of these 
cherubim spread themselves forth 
twenty cubits; and they stood on their 
feet, and their faces were inward. 

14And he made the veil of blue, and 
purple, and crimson, and fine linen, 
and wrought cherubim thereon. 

15Also he made before the house 
two pillars of thirty and five cubits 
high, and the capital that was on the 
top of each of them was five cubits. 

16And he made chains in the 
Sanctuary, and put them on the tops of 
the pillars; and he made a hundred 
pomegranates, and put them on the 
chains. 17And he set up the pillars 
before the temple, one on the right 
hand, and the other on the left; and 
called the name of that on the right 
hand Jachin, and the name of that on 
the left Boaz. 

Moreover he made an altar of 
brass, twenty cubits the length 
thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth 
thereof, and ten cubits the height 
thereof. 

2Also he made the molten sea of ten 
cubits from brim to brim, round in 
compass, and the height thereof was 
five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits 
did compass it round about. 3And 
under it was the similitude of oxen, 
which did compass it round about, for 
ten cubits, compassing the sea round 
about. The oxen were in two rows, cast 
when it was cast. 4It stood upon twelve 
oxen, three looking toward the north, 
and three looking toward the west, and 
three looking toward the south, and 
three looking toward the east; and the 
sea was set upon them above, and all 
their hinder parts were inward. 5And it 
was a handbreadth thick; and the brim 
thereof was wrought like the brim of a 
cup, like the flower of a lily: it 
received and held three thousand 
baths. 

6He made also ten lavers, and put 
five on the right hand, and five on the 
left, to wash in them; such things as 
belonged to the burnt-offering they 
washed in them; but the sea was for 
the priests to wash in. 

7And he made the ten candlesticks 
of gold according to the ordinance 
concerning them; and he set them in 
the temple, five on the right hand, and 
five on the left. 

8He made also ten tables, and placed 
them in the temple, five on the right 
side, and five on the left. And he made 
a hundred basins of gold. 

9Furthermore he made the court of 
the priests, and the great court, and 
doors for the court, and overlaid the 
doors of them with brass. 

10And he set the sea on the right side 
[of the house] eastward, toward the 
south. 

11And Huram made the pots, and the 
shovels, and the basins. So Huram 
made an end of doing the work that he 
wrought for king Solomon in the 
house of God: 12the two pillars, and the 
4 




bowls, and the two capitals which 
were on the top of the pillars; and the 
two networks to cover the two bowls 
of the capitals that were on the top of 
the pillars; 13and the four hundred 
pomegranates for the two networks: 
two rows of pomegranates for each 
network, to cover the two bowls of the 
capitals that were upon the top of the 
pillars. 14He made also the bases, and 
the lavers made he upon the bases; 
15one sea, and the twelve oxen under 
it. 16The pots also, and the shovels, and 
the flesh-hooks, and all the vessels 
thereof, did Huram his master 
craftsman make for king Solomon for 
the house of the LORD of bright brass. 
17In the plain of the Jordan did the king 
cast them, in the clay ground between 
Succoth and Zeredah. 18Thus Solomon 
made all these vessels in great 
abundance; for the weight of the brass 
could not be found out. 

19And Solomon made all the vessels 
that were in the house of God, the 
golden altar also, and the tables 
whereon was the showbread; 20and the 
candlesticks with their lamps, that they 
should burn according to the ordinance 
before the Sanctuary, of pure gold; 
21and the flowers, and the lamps, and 
the tongs, of gold, and that perfect 
gold; 22and the snuffers, and the 
basins, and the pans, and the fire-pans, 
of pure gold. And as for the entry of 
the house, the inner doors thereof for 
the most holy place, and the doors of 
the house, that is, of the temple, were 
of gold. 

Thus all the work that Solomon 
wrought for the house of the LORD 
was finished. And Solomon brought in 
the things that David his father had 
hallowed; even the silver, and the 
gold, and all the vessels, and put them 
in the treasuries of the house of God. 

2Then Solomon assembled the 
elders of Israel, and all the heads of the 
tribes, the princes of the fathers’houses 
of the children of Israel, unto 
Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD out of the city of 
David, which is Zion. 3And all the men 
of Israel assembled themselves unto 
the king at the feast, which was in the 
seventh month. 4And all the elders of 
Israel came, and the Levites took up 
the ark. 5And they brought up the ark, 
and the tent of meeting, and all the 
holy vessels that were in the Tent; 
these did the priests and the Levites 
bring up. 6And king Solomon and all 
the congregation of Israel, that were 
assembled unto him, were before the 
ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that 
could not be counted nor numbered for 
multitude. 7And the priests brought in 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD 
unto its place, into the Sanctuary of the 
house, to the most holy place, even 
under the wings of the cherubim. 8For 
the cherubim spread forth their wings 
over the place of the ark, and the 
cherubim covered the ark and the 
staves thereof above. 9And the staves 
were so long that the ends of the staves 
were seen from the ark before the 
Sanctuary; but they could not be seen 
5 




without; and there they are unto this 
day. 10There was nothing in the ark 
save the two tables which Moses put 
there at Horeb, when the LORD made a 
covenant with the children of Israel, 
when they came out of Egypt. 

11And it came to pass, when the 
priests were come out of the holy 
place—for all the priests that were 
present had sanctified themselves, and 
did not keep their courses; 12also the 
Levites who were the singers, all of 
them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, 
and their sons and their brethren, 
arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and 
psalteries and harps, stood at the east 
end of the altar, and with them a 
hundred and twenty priests sounding 
with trumpets—13it came even to pass, 
when the trumpeters and singers were 
as one, to make one sound to be heard 
in praising and thanking the LORD; and 
when they lifted up their voice with 
the trumpets and cymbals and 
instruments of music, and praised the 
LORD: ‘for He is good, for His mercy 
endureth for ever’; that then the house 
was filled with a cloud, even the house 
of the LORD, 14so that the priests could 
not stand to minister by reason of the 
cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled 
the house of God. 

Then spoke Solomon: 

The LORD hath said that He 
would dwell in the thick 
darkness. 

2But I have built Thee a house of 
habitation, 

And a place for Thee to dwell in for 
ever. 

3And the king turned his face, and 
blessed all the congregation of Israel; 
and all the congregation of Israel 
stood. 4And he said: ‘Blessed be the 
LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke 
with His mouth unto David my father, 
and hath with His hands fulfilled it, 
saying: 5Since the day that I brought 
forth My people out of the land of 
Egypt, I chose no city out of all the 
tribes of Israel to build a house in, that 
My name might be there; neither chose 
I any man to be prince over My people 
Israel; 6but I have chosen Jerusalem, 
that My name might be there; and have 
chosen David to be over My people 
Israel. 7Now it was in the heart of 
David my father to build a house for 
the name of the LORD, the God of 
Israel. 8But the LORD said unto David 
my father: Whereas it was in thy heart 
to build a house for My name, thou 
didst well that it was in thy heart; 
9nevertheless thou shalt not build the 
house, but thy son that shall come 
forth out of thy loins, he shall build the 
house for My name. 10And the LORD 
hath established His word that He 
spoke; for I am risen up in the room of 
David my father, and sit on the throne 
of Israel, as the LORD promised, and 
have built the house for the name of 
the LORD, the God of Israel. 11And 
there have I set the ark, wherein is the 
covenant of the LORD, which He made 
with the children of Israel.’ 
6 




12And he stood before the altar of 
the LORD in the presence of all the 
congregation of Israel, and spread 
forth his hands—13for Solomon had 
made a brazen scaffold, of five cubits 
long, and five cubits broad, and three 
cubits high, and had set it in the midst 
of the court; and upon it he stood, and 
kneeled down upon his knees before 
all the congregation of Israel, and 
spread forth his hands toward 
heaven—14and he said: ‘O LORD, the 
God of Israel, there is no God like 
Thee, in the heaven, or in the earth; 
who keepest covenant and mercy with 
Thy servants, that walk before Thee 
with all their heart; 15who hast kept 
with Thy servant David my father that 
which Thou didst promise him; yea, 
Thou spokest with Thy mouth, and 
hast fulfilled it with Thy hand, as it is 
this day. 16Now therefore, O LORD, the 
God of Israel, keep with Thy servant 
David my father that which Thou hast 
promised him, saying: There shall not 
fail thee a man in My sight to sit on 
the throne of Israel; if only thy 
children take heed to their way, to 
walk in My law as thou hast walked 
before Me. 17Now therefore, O LORD, 
the God of Israel, let Thy word be 
verified, which Thou spokest unto Thy 
servant David. 

18But will God in very truth dwell 
with men on the earth? behold, heaven 
and the heaven of heavens cannot 
contain Thee; how much less this 
house which I have builded! 19Yet 
have Thou respect unto the prayer of 
Thy servant, and to his supplication, O 
LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry 
and to the prayer which Thy servant 
prayeth before Thee; 20that Thine eyes 
may be open toward this house day 
and night, even toward the place 
whereof Thou hast said that thou 
wouldest put Thy name there; to 
hearken unto the prayer which Thy 
servant shall pray toward this place. 
21And hearken Thou to the 
supplications of Thy servant, and of 
Thy people Israel, when they shall 
pray toward this place; yea, hear Thou 
from Thy dwelling-place, even from 
heaven; and when Thou hearest, 
forgive. 

22If a man sin against his neighbour, 
and an oath be exacted of him to cause 
him to swear, and he come and swear 
before Thine altar in this house; 23then 
hear Thou from heaven, and do, and 
judge Thy servants, requiting the 
wicked, to bring his way upon his own 
head; and justifying the righteous, to 
give him according to his 
righteousness. 

24And if Thy people Israel be 
smitten down before the enemy, when 
they sin against Thee, and shall turn 
again and confess Thy name, and pray 
and make supplication before Thee in 
this house; 25then hear Thou from 
heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy 
people Israel, and bring them back 
unto the land which Thou gavest to 
them and to their fathers. 

26When the heaven is shut up, and 
there is no rain, when they sin against 


Thee; if they pray toward this place, 
and confess Thy name, turning from 
their sin, when Thou dost afflict them; 
27then hear Thou in heaven, and 
forgive the sin of Thy servants, and of 
Thy people Israel, when Thou dost 
direct them on the good way wherein 
they should walk; and send rain upon 
Thy land, which Thou hast given to 
Thy people for an inheritance. 

28If there be in the land famine, if 
there be pestilence, if there be blasting 
or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their 
enemies besiege them in the land of 
their cities; whatsoever plague or 
whatsoever sickness there be; 29what 
prayer and supplication soever be 
made by any man, or by all Thy people 
Israel, who shall know every man his 
own plague and his own pain, and 
shall spread forth his hands toward this 
house; 30then hear Thou from heaven 
Thy dwelling-place, and forgive, and 
render unto every man according to all 
his ways, whose heart Thou 
knowest—for Thou, even Thou only, 
knowest the hearts of the children of 
men—31that they may fear Thee, to 
walk in Thy ways, all the days that 
they live in the land which Thou 
gavest unto our fathers. 

32Moreover concerning the stranger, 
that is not of Thy people Israel, when 
be shall come out of a far country for 
Thy great name’s sake, and Thy 
mighty hand, and Thine outstretched 
arm; when they shall come and pray 
toward this house; 33then hear Thou 
from heaven, even from Thy dwelling-
place, and do according to all that the 
stranger calleth to Thee for; that all the 
peoples of the earth may know Thy 
name, and fear Thee, as doth Thy 
people Israel, and that they may know 
that Thy name is called upon this 
house which I have built. 

34If Thy people go out to battle 
against their enemies, by whatsoever 
way Thou shalt send them, and they 
pray unto Thee toward this city which 
Thou hast chosen, and the house which 
I have built for Thy name; 35then hear 
Thou from heaven their prayer and 
their supplication, and maintain their 
cause. 36If they sin against Thee—for 
there is no man that sinneth not—and 
Thou be angry with them, and deliver 
them to the enemy, so that they carry 
them away captive unto a land far off 
or near; 37yet if they shall bethink 
themselves in the land whither they are 
carried captive, and turn, and make 
supplication unto Thee in the land of 
their captivity, saying: We have 
sinned, we have done iniquitously, and 
have dealt wickedly; 38if they return 
unto Thee with all their heart and with 
all their soul in the land of their 
captivity, whither they have carried 
them captive, and pray toward their 
land, which Thou gavest unto their 
fathers, and the city which Thou hast 
chosen, and toward the house which I 
have built for Thy name; 39then hear 
Thou from heaven, even from Thy 
dwelling-place, their prayer and their 
supplications, and maintain their 


cause; and forgive Thy people who 
have sinned against Thee. 

40Now, O my God, let, I beseech 
Thee, Thine eyes be open, and let 
Thine ears be attent, unto the prayer 
that is made in this place. 

41Now therefore arise, O LORD God, 
into Thy resting-place, 

Thou, and the ark of Thy strength; 

Let Thy priests, O LORD God, be 
clothed with salvation, 

And let Thy saints rejoice in good. 

42O LORD God, turn not away the 
face of Thine anointed; 

Remember the good deeds of David 
Thy servant.’ 

 

Now when Solomon had made an 
end of praying, the fire came 
down from heaven, and consumed the 
burnt-offering and the sacrifices; and 
the glory of the LORD filled the house. 
2And the priests could not enter into 
the house of the LORD, because the 
glory of the LORD filled the LORD’S 
house. 3And all the children of Israel 
looked on, when the fire came down, 
and the glory of the LORD was upon the 
house; and they bowed themselves 
with their faces to the ground upon the 
pavement, and prostrated themselves, 
and gave thanks unto the LORD; ‘for He 
is good, for His mercy endureth for 
ever.’ 

4And the king and all the people 
offered sacrifice before the LORD. 5And 
king Solomon offered a sacrifice of 
twenty and two thousand oxen, and a 
hundred and twenty thousand sheep. 
So the king and all the people 
dedicated the house of God. 6And the 
priests stood, according to their 
offices; the Levites also with 
instruments of music of the LORD, 
which David the king had made, to 
give thanks unto the LORD, for His 
mercy endureth for ever, with the 
praises of David by their hand; and the 
priests sounded trumpets over against 
them; and all Israel stood. 7Moreover 
Solomon hallowed the middle of the 
court that was before the house of the 
LORD; for there he offered the burnt-
offerings, and the fat of the peace-
offerings; because the brazen altar 
which Solomon had made was not able 
to receive the burnt-offering, and the 
meal-offering, and the fat. 

8So Solomon held the feast at that 
time seven days, and all Israel with 
him, a very great congregation, from 
the entrance of Hamath unto the Brook 
of Egypt. 9And on the eighth day they 
held a solemn assembly; for they kept 
the dedication of the altar seven days, 
and the feast seven days. 10And on the 
three and twentieth day of the seventh 
month he sent the people away unto 
their tents, joyful and glad of heart for 
the goodness that the LORD had shown 
unto David, and to Solomon, and to 
Israel His people. 

11Thus Solomon finished the house 
of the LORD, and the king’s house; and 
all that came into Solomon’s heart to 
make in the house of the LORD, and in 
his own house, he prosperously 
effected. 12And the LORD appeared to 
7 




Solomon by night, and said unto him: 
‘I have heard thy prayer, and have 
chosen this place to Myself for a house 
of sacrifice. 13If I shut up heaven that 
there be no rain, or if I command the 
locust to devour the land, or if I send 
pestilence among My people; 14if My 
people, upon whom My name is 
called, shall humble themselves, and 
pray, and seek My face, and turn from 
their evil ways; then will I hear from 
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and 
will heal their land. 15Now Mine eyes 
shall be open, and Mine ears attent, 
unto the prayer that is made in this 
place. 16For now have I chosen and 
hallowed this house, that My name 
may be there for ever; and Mine eyes 
and My heart shall be there 
perpetually. 17And as for thee, if thou 
wilt walk before Me as David thy 
father walked, and do according to all 
that I have commanded thee, and wilt 
keep My statutes and Mine ordinances; 
18then I will establish the throne of thy 
kingdom, according as I covenanted 
with David thy father, saying: There 
shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in 
Israel. 19But if ye turn away, and 
forsake My statutes and My 
commandments which I have set 
before you, and shall go and serve 
other gods, and worship them; 20then 
will I pluck them up by the roots out of 
My land which I have given them; and 
this house, which I have hallowed for 
My name, will I cast out of My sight, 
and I will make it a proverb and a 
byword among all peoples. 21And this 
house, which is so high, every one that 
passeth by it shall be astonished, and 
shall say: Why hath the LORD done 
thus unto this land, and to this house? 
22And they shall answer: Because they 
forsook the LORD, the God of their 
fathers, who brought them forth out of 
the land of Egypt, and laid hold on 
other gods, and worshipped them, and 
served them; therefore hath He 
brought all this evil upon them.’ 

And it came to pass at the end of 
twenty years, wherein Solomon 
had built the house of the LORD, and 
his own house, 2that the cities which 
Huram had given to Solomon, 
Solomon built them, and caused the 
children of Israel to dwell there. 

3And Solomon went to Hamath-
zobah, and prevailed against it. 4And 
he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and 
all the store-cities, which he built in 
Hamath. 5Also he built Beth-horon the 
upper, and Beth-horon the nether, 
fortified cities, with walls, gates, and 
bars; 6and Baalath, and all the store-
cities that Solomon had, and all the 
cities for his chariots, and the cities for 
his horsemen, and all that Solomon 
desired to build for his pleasure in 
Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all 
the land of his dominion. 

7As for all the people that were left 
of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and 
the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the 
Jebusites, who were not of Israel; 8of 
their children that were left after them 
in the land, whom the children of 
Israel consumed not, of them did 
8 




Solomon raise a levy of bondservants, 
unto this day. 9But of the children of 
Israel did Solomon make no servants 
for his work; but they were men of 
war, and chief of his captains, and 
rulers of his chariots and of his 
horsemen. 

10And these were the chief officers 
of king Solomon, even two hundred 
and fifty, that bore rule over the 
people. 

11And Solomon brought up the 
daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of 
David unto the house that he had built 
for her; for he said: ‘No wife of mine 
shall dwell in the house of David king 
of Israel, because the places are holy, 
whereunto the ark of the LORD hath 
come.’ 

12Then Solomon offered burnt-
offerings unto the LORD on the altar of 
the LORD, which he had built before the 
porch, 13even as the duty of every day 
required, offering according to the 
commandment of Moses, on the 
sabbaths, and on the new moons, and 
on the appointed seasons, three times 
in the year, even in the feast of 
unleavened bread, and in the feast of 
weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles. 
14And he appointed, according to the 
ordinance of David his father, the 
courses of the priests to their service, 
and the Levites to their charges, to 
praise, and to minister before the 
priests, as the duty of every day 
required; the doorkeepers also by their 
courses at every gate; for so had David 
the man of God commanded. 15And 
they departed not from the 
commandment of the king unto the 
priests and Levites concerning any 
matter, or concerning the treasures. 
16So all the work of Solomon was set 
in order from the day of the foundation 
of the house of the LORD, and until it 
was finished. So the house of the LORD 
was perfected. 

17Then went Solomon to Ezion-
geber, and to Eloth, on the sea-shore in 
the land of Edom. 18And Huram sent 
him by the hands of his servants ships, 
and servants that had knowledge of the 
sea; and they came with the servants of 
Solomon to Ophir, and fetched from 
thence four hundred and fifty talents of 
gold, and brought them to king 
Solomon. 

And when the queen of Sheba 
heard of the fame of Solomon, 
she came to prove Solomon with hard 
questions at Jerusalem, with a very 
great train, and camels that bore spices 
and gold in abundance, and precious 
stones; and when she was come to 
Solomon, she spoke with him of all 
that was in her heart. 2And Solomon 
told her all her questions; and there 
was not any thing hid from Solomon 
which he told her not. 3And when the 
queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom 
of Solomon, and the house that he had 
built, 4and the food of his table, and 
the sitting of his servants, and the 
attendance of his ministers, and their 
apparel; his cupbearers also, and their 
apparel; and his ascent by which he 
went up into the house of the LORD; 
9 




there was no more spirit in her. 5And 
she said to the king: ‘It was a true 
report that I heard in mine own land of 
thine acts, and of thy wisdom. 
6Howbeit I believed not their words, 
until I came, and mine eyes had seen 
it; and, behold, the half of the 
greatness of thy wisdom was not told 
me; thou exceedest the fame that I 
heard. 7Happy are thy men, and happy 
are these thy servants, that stand 
continually before thee, and hear thy 
wisdom. 8Blessed be the LORD thy 
God, who delighted in thee, to set thee 
on His throne, to be king for the LORD 
thy God; because thy God loved Israel, 
to establish them for ever, therefore 
made He thee king over them, to do 
justice and righteousness.’ 

9And she gave the king a hundred 
and twenty talents of gold, and spices 
in great abundance, and precious 
stones; neither was there any such 
spice as the queen of Sheba gave to 
king Solomon. 10And the servants also 
of Huram, and the servants of 
Solomon that brought gold from 
Ophir, brought sandal-wood and 
precious stones. 11And the king made 
of the sandal-wood paths for the house 
of the LORD, and for the king’s house, 
and harps and psalteries for the 
singers; and there were none such seen 
before in the land of Judah. 12And king 
Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba 
all her desire, whatsoever she asked, 
beside that which she had brought unto 
the king. So she turned, and went to 
her own land, she and her servants. 
13Now the weight of gold that came 
to Solomon in one year was six 
hundred and threescore and six talents 
of gold; 14beside that which the 
traffickers and merchants brought; and 
all the kings of Arabia and the 
governors of the country brought gold 
and silver to Solomon. 15And king 
Solomon made two hundred targets of 
beaten gold: six hundred shekels of 
beaten gold went to one target; 16three 
hundred shields of beaten gold also: 
three hundred shekels of gold went to 
one shield; and the king put them in 
the house of the forest of Lebanon. 

17Moreover the king made a great 
throne of ivory, and overlaid it with 
pure gold. 18And there were six steps 
to the throne, with a footstool of gold, 
which were fastened to the throne, and 
arms on either side by the place of the 
seat, and two lions standing beside the 
arms. 19And twelve lions stood there 
on the one side and on the other upon 
the six steps; there was not the like 
made in any kingdom. 

20And all king Solomon’s drinking-
vessels were of gold, and all the 
vessels of the house of the forest of 
Lebanon were of pure gold; silver was 
nothing accounted of in the days of 
Solomon. 21For the king had ships that 
went to Tarshish with the servants of 
Huram; once every three years came 
the ships of Tarshish, bringing gold, 
and silver, ivory, and apes, and 
peacocks. 

22So king Solomon exceeded all the 
kings of the earth in riches and 


wisdom. 23And all the kings of the 
earth sought the presence of Solomon, 
to hear his wisdom, which God had 
put in his heart. 24And they brought 
every man his present, vessels of 
silver, and vessels of gold, and 
raiment, armour, and spices, horses, 
and mules, a rate year by year. 

25And Solomon had four thousand 
stalls for horses and chariots, and 
twelve thousand horsemen, that he 
bestowed in the chariot cities, and with 
the king at Jerusalem. 26And he ruled 
over all the kings from the River even 
unto the land of the Philistines, and to 
the border of Egypt. 27And the king 
made silver to be in Jerusalem as 
stones, and cedars made he to be as the 
sycamore-trees that are in the 
Lowland, for abundance. 28And they 
brought horses for Solomon out of 
Egypt, and out of all lands. 

29Now the rest of the acts of 
Solomon, first and last, are they not 
written in the words of Nathan the 
prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah 
the Shilonite, and in the visions of 
Jedo the seer concerning Jeroboam the 
son of Nebat? 30And Solomon reigned 
in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years. 
31And Solomon slept with his fathers; 
they buried him in the city of David 
his father; and Rehoboam his son 
reigned in his stead. 

And Rehoboam went to 
Shechem; for all Israel were 
come to Shechem to make him king. 
2And it came to pass, when Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat heard of it—for he 
was in Egypt, whither he had fled from 
the presence of king Solomon—that 
Jeroboam returned out of Egypt. 3And 
they sent and called him; and 
Jeroboam and all Israel came, and they 
spoke to Rehoboam, saying: 4’Thy 
father made our yoke grievous; now 
therefore make thou the grievous 
service of thy father, and his heavy 
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, 
and we will serve thee.’ 5And he said 
unto them: ‘Come again unto me after 
three days.’ And the people departed. 

6And king Rehoboam took counsel 
with the old men, that had stood before 
Solomon his father while he yet lived, 
saying: ‘What counsel give ye me to 
return answer to this people?’ 7And 
they spoke unto him, saying: ‘If thou 
be kind to this people, and please 
them, and speak good words to them, 
then they will be thy servants for 
ever.’ 8But he forsook the counsel of 
the old men which they had given him, 
and took counsel with the young men 
that were grown up with him, that 
stood before him. 9And he said unto 
them: ‘What counsel give ye, that we 
may return answer to this people, who 
have spoken to me, saying: Make the 
yoke that thy father did put upon us 
lighter?’ 10And the young men that 
were grown up with him spoke unto 
him, saying: ‘Thus shalt thou say unto 
the people that spoke unto thee, 
saying: Thy father made our yoke 
heavy, but make thou it lighter unto 
us; thus shalt thou say unto them: My 
little finger is thicker than my father’s 
10 




loins. 11And now whereas my father 
did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will 
add to your yoke; my father chastised 
you with whips, but I will chastise you 
with scorpions.’ 

12So Jeroboam and all the people 
came to Rehoboam the third day, as 
the king bade, saying: ‘Come to me 
again the third day.’ 13And the king 
answered them roughly; and king 
Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the 
old men, 14and spoke to them after the 
counsel of the young men, saying: 
‘[My father] made your yoke heavy, 
but I will add thereto; my father 
chastised you with whips, but I will 
chastise you with scorpions.’ 15So the 
king hearkened not unto the people; 
for it was brought about of God, that 
the LORD might establish His word, 
which He spoke by the hand of Ahijah 
the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of 
Nebat. 

16And when all Israel [saw] that the 
king hearkened not unto them, the 
people answered the king, saying: 
‘What portion have we in David? 
neither have we inheritance in the son 
of Jesse; every man to your tents, O 
Israel; now see to thine own house, 
David.’ So all Israel departed unto 
their tents. 17But as for the children of 
Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, 
Rehoboam reigned over them. 18Then 
king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who 
was over the levy; and the children of 
Israel stoned him with stones, so that 
he died. And king Rehoboam made 
speed to get him up to his chariot, to 
flee to Jerusalem. 19So Israel rebelled 
against the house of David unto this 
day. 

And when Rehoboam was 
come to Jerusalem, he 
assembled the house of Judah and 
Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore 
thousand chosen men, that were 
warriors, to fight against Israel, to 
bring the kingdom back to Rehoboam. 
2But the word of the LORD came to 
Shemaiah the man of God, saying: 
3’Speak unto Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon, king of Judah, and to all 
Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying: 
4Thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not go 
up, nor fight against your brethren; 
return every man to his house, for this 
thing is of Me.’ So they hearkened 
unto the words of the LORD, and 
returned from going against Jeroboam. 

5And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, 
and built cities for defence in Judah. 
6He built even Beth-lehem, and Etam, 
and Tekoa, 7and Beth-zur, and Soco, 
and Adullam, 8and Gath, and 
Mareshah, and Ziph, 9and Adoraim, 
and Lachish, and Azekah, 10and Zorah, 
and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in 
Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities. 
11And he fortified the strongholds, and 
put captains in them, and store of 
victual, and oil and wine. 12And in 
every city he put shields and spears, 
and made them exceeding strong. And 
Judah and Benjamin adhered to him. 

13And the priests and the Levites 
that were in all Israel presented 
themselves to him out of all their 
11 




border. 14For the Levites left their open 
land and their possession, and came to 
Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam 
and his sons cast them off, that they 
should not execute the priest’s office 
unto the LORD; 15and he appointed him 
priests for the high places, and for the 
satyrs, and for the calves which he had 
made. 16And after them, out of all the 
tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts 
to seek the LORD, the God of Israel, 
came to Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the 
LORD, the God of their fathers. 17So 
they strengthened the kingdom of 
Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of 
Solomon strong, three years; for they 
walked three years in the way of David 
and Solomon. 

18And Rehoboam took him a wife, 
Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the 
son of David, and of Abihail the 
daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse; 
19and she bore him sons: Jeush, and 
Shemariah, and Zaham. 20And after 
her he took Maacah the daughter of 
Absalom; and she bore him Abijah, 
and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith. 
21And Rehoboam loved Maacah the 
daughter of Absalom above all his 
wives and his concubines—for he took 
eighteen wives, and threescore 
concubines, and begot twenty and 
eight sons and threescore daughters. 
22And Rehoboam appointed Abijah the 
son of Maacah to be chief, even the 
prince among his brethren; for he was 
minded to make him king. 23And he 
dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his 
sons throughout all the lands of Judah 
and Benjamin, unto every fortified 
city; and he gave them victual in 
abundance. And he sought for them 
many wives. 

And it came to pass, when the 
kingdom of Rehoboam was 
established, and he was strong, that he 
forsook the law of the LORD, and all 
Israel with him. 2And it came to pass 
in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, 
that Shishak king of Egypt came up 
against Jerusalem, because they had 
dealt treacherously with the LORD, 
3with twelve hundred chariots, and 
threescore thousand horsemen; and the 
people were without number that came 
with him out of Egypt; the Lubim, the 
Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians. 4And he 
took the fortified cities which 
pertained to Judah, and came unto 
Jerusalem. 5Now Shemaiah the 
prophet came to Rehoboam, and to the 
princes of Judah, that were gathered 
together to Jerusalem because of 
Shishak, and said unto them: ‘Thus 
saith the LORD: Ye have forsaken Me, 
therefore have I also left you in the 
hand of Shishak.’ 6Then the princes of 
Israel and the king humbled 
themselves; and they said: ‘The LORD 
is righteous.’ 7And when the LORD saw 
that they humbled themselves, the 
word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, 
saying: ‘They have humbled 
themselves; I will not destroy them; 
but I will grant them some deliverance, 
and My wrath shall not be poured out 
upon Jerusalem by the hand of 
Shishak. 8Nevertheless they shall be 
12 




his servants; that they may know My 
service, and the service of the 
kingdoms of the countries.’ 

9So Shishak king of Egypt came up 
against Jerusalem, and took away the 
treasures of the house of the LORD, and 
the treasures of the king’s house; he 
took all away; he took away also the 
shields of gold which Solomon had 
made. 10And king Rehoboam made in 
their stead shields of brass, and 
committed them to the hands of the 
captains of the guard, that kept the 
door of the king’s house. 11And it was 
so, that as oft as the king entered into 
the house of the LORD, the guard came 
and bore them, and brought them back 
into the guard-chamber. 12And when 
he humbled himself, the anger of the 
LORD turned from him, that He would 
not destroy him altogether; and 
moreover in Judah there were good 
things found. 

13So king Rehoboam strengthened 
himself in Jerusalem, and reigned; for 
Rehoboam was forty and one years old 
when he began to reign, and he 
reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, 
the city which the LORD had chosen out 
of all the tribes of Israel, to put His 
name there; and his mother’s name 
was Naamah the Ammonitess. 14And 
he did that which was evil, because he 
set not his heart to seek the LORD. 

15Now the acts of Rehoboam, first 
and last, are they not written in the 
histories of Shemaiah the prophet and 
of Iddo the seer, after the manner of 
genealogies? And there were wars 
between Rehoboam and Jeroboam 
continually. 16And Rehoboam slept 
with his fathers, and was buried in the 
city of David; and Abijah his son 
reigned in his stead. 

In the eighteenth year of king 
Jeroboam began Abijah to 
reign over Judah. 2Three years reigned 
he in Jerusalem; and his mother’s 
name was Micaiah the daughter of 
Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war 
between Abijah and Jeroboam. 3And 
Abijah joined battle with an army of 
valiant men of war, even four hundred 
thousand chosen men; and Jeroboam 
set the battle in array against him with 
eight hundred thousand chosen men, 
who were mighty men of valour. 4And 
Abijah stood up upon mount 
Zemaraim, which is in the hill-country 
of Ephraim, and said: ‘Hear me, O 
Jeroboam and all Israel; 5ought ye not 
to know that the LORD, the God of 
Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to 
David for ever, even to him and to his 
sons by a covenant of salt? 6Yet 
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant 
of Solomon the son of David, rose up, 
and rebelled against his lord. 7And 
there were gathered unto him vain 
men, base fellows that strengthened 
themselves against Rehoboam the son 
of Solomon, when Rehoboam was 
young and faint-hearted, and could not 
withstand them. 8And now ye think to 
withstand the kingdom of the LORD in 
the hand of the sons of David; and ye 
are a great multitude, and there are 
with you the golden calves which 
13 




Jeroboam made you for gods. 9Have 
ye not driven out the priests of the 
LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the 
Levites, and have made you priests 
after the manner of the peoples of 
other lands? so that whosoever cometh 
to consecrate himself with a young 
bullock and seven rams, the same 
becometh a priest of them that are no 
gods. 10But as for us, the LORD is our 
God, and we have not forsaken Him; 
and we have priests ministering unto 
the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the 
Levites in their work; 11and they burn 
unto the LORD every morning and 
every evening burnt-offerings and 
sweet incense; the showbread also set 
they in order upon the pure table; and 
the candlestick of gold with the lamps 
thereof, to burn every evening; for we 
keep the charge of the LORD our God; 
but ye have forsaken Him. 12And, 
behold, God is with us at our head, and 
His priests with the trumpets of alarm 
to sound an alarm against you. O 
children of Israel, fight ye not against 
the LORD, the God of your fathers; for 
ye shall not prosper.’ 

13But Jeroboam caused an 
ambushment to come about behind 
them; so they were before Judah, and 
the ambushment was behind them. 
14And when Judah looked back, 
behold, the battle was before and 
behind them; and they cried unto the 
LORD, and the priests sounded with the 
trumpets. 15Then the men of Judah 
gave a shout; and as the men of Judah 
shouted, it came to pass, that God 
smote Jeroboam and all Israel before 
Abijah and Judah. 16And the children 
of Israel fled before Judah; and God 
delivered them into their hand. 17And 
Abijah and his people slew them with 
a great slaughter; so there fell down 
slain of Israel five hundred thousand 
chosen men. 18Thus the children of 
Israel were brought under at that time, 
and the children of Judah prevailed, 
because they relied upon the LORD, the 
God of their fathers. 19And Abijah 
pursued after Jeroboam, and took 
cities from him, Bethel with the towns 
thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns 
thereof, and Ephrain with the towns 
thereof. 20Neither did Jeroboam 
recover strength again in the days of 
Abijah; and the LORD smote him, and 
he died. 21But Abijah waxed mighty, 
and took unto himself fourteen wives, 
and begot twenty and two sons, and 
sixteen daughters. 22And the rest of the 
acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his 
sayings, are written in the commentary 
of the prophet Iddo. 

23So Abijah slept with his fathers, 
and they buried him in the city of 
David, and Asa his son reigned in his 
stead; in his days the land was quiet 

ten years. 1And Asa did that 
which was good and right in 
the eyes of the LORD his God; 2for he 
took away the strange altars, and the 
high places, and broke down the 
pillars, and hewed down the Asherim; 
3and commanded Judah to seek the 
LORD, the God of their fathers, and to 
do the law and the commandment. 
14 




4Also he took away out of all the cities 
of Judah the high places and the sun-
images; and the kingdom was quiet 
before him. 5And he built fortified 
cities in Judah; for the land was quiet, 
and he had no war in those years; 
because the LORD had given him rest. 
6For he said unto Judah: ‘Let us build 
these cities, and make about them 
walls, and towers, gates, and bars; the 
land is yet before us, because we have 
sought the LORD our God; we have 
sought Him, and He hath given us rest 
on every side.’ So they built and 
prospered. 7And Asa had an army that 
bore bucklers and spears, out of Judah 
three hundred thousand; and out of 
Benjamin, that bore shields and drew 
bows, two hundred and fourscore 
thousand; all these were mighty men 
of valour. 

8And there came out against them 
Zerah the Ethiopian with an army of a 
thousand thousand, and three hundred 
chariots; and he came unto Mareshah. 
9Then Asa went out to meet him, and 
they set the battle in array in the valley 
of Zephath at Mareshah. 10And Asa 
cried unto the LORD his God, and said: 
‘LORD, there is none beside Thee to 
help, between the mighty and him that 
hath no strength; help us, O LORD our 
God; for we rely on Thee, and in Thy 
name are we come against this 
multitude. Thou art the LORD our God; 
let not man prevail against Thee.’ 11So 
the LORD smote the Ethiopians before 
Asa, and before Judah; and the 
Ethiopians fled. 12And Asa and the 
people that were with him pursued 
them unto Gerar; and there fell of the 
Ethiopians so that none remained 
alive; for they were shattered before 
the LORD, and before His host; and 
they carried away very much booty. 
13And they smote all the cities round 
about Gerar; for a terror from the LORD 
came upon them; and they spoiled all 
the cities; for there was much spoil in 
them. 14They smote also the tents of 
cattle, and carried away sheep in 
abundance and camels, and returned to 
Jerusalem. 

And the spirit of God came 
upon Azariah the son of Oded; 
2and he went out to meet Asa, and said 
unto him: ‘Hear ye me, Asa, and all 
Judah and Benjamin: the LORD is with 
you, while ye are with Him; and if ye 
seek Him, He will be found of you; but 
if ye forsake Him, He will forsake you. 
3Now for long seasons Israel was 
without the true God, and without a 
teaching priest, and without law; 4but 
when in their distress they turned unto 
the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought 
Him, He was found of them. 5And in 
those times there was no peace to him 
that went out, nor to him that came in, 
but great discomfitures were upon all 
the inhabitants of the lands. 6And they 
were broken in pieces, nation against 
nation, and city against city; for God 
did discomfit them with all manner of 
adversity. 7But be ye strong, and let 
not your hands be slack; for your work 
shall be rewarded.’ 
15 




8And when Asa heard these words, 
even the prophecy of Oded the 
prophet, he took courage, and put 
away the detestable things out of all 
the land of Judah and Benjamin, and 
out of the cities which he had taken 
from the hill-country of Ephraim; and 
he renewed the altar of the LORD, that 
was before the porch of the LORD. 
9And he gathered all Judah and 
Benjamin, and them that sojourned 
with them out of Ephraim and 
Manasseh, and out of Simeon; for they 
fell to him out of Israel in abundance, 
when they saw that the LORD his God 
was with him. 10So they gathered 
themselves together at Jerusalem in the 
third month, in the fifteenth year of the 
reign of Asa. 11And they sacrificed 
unto the LORD in that day, of the spoil 
which they had brought, seven 
hundred oxen and seven thousand 
sheep. 12And they entered into the 
covenant to seek the LORD, the God of 
their fathers, with all their heart and 
with all their soul; 13and that 
whosoever would not seek the LORD, 
the God of Israel, should be put to 
death, whether small or great, whether 
man or woman. 14And they swore unto 
the LORD with a loud voice, and with 
shouting, and with trumpets, and with 
horns. 15And all Judah rejoiced at the 
oath; for they had sworn with all their 
heart, and sought Him with their whole 
desire; and He was found of them; and 
the LORD gave them rest round about. 

16And also Maacah the mother of 
Asa the king, he removed her from 
being queen, because she had made an 
abominable image for an Asherah; and 
Asa cut down her image, and made 
dust of it, and burnt it at the brook 
Kidron. 17But the high places were not 
taken away out of Israel; nevertheless 
the heart of Asa was whole all his 
days. 18And he brought into the house 
of God the things that his father had 
hallowed, and that he himself had 
hallowed, silver, and gold, and vessels. 
19And there was no more war unto the 
five and thirtieth year of the reign of 
Asa. 

16 



In the six and thirtieth year of 
the reign of Asa, Baasa king of 
Israel went up against Judah, and built 
Ramah, that he might not suffer any to 
go out or come in to Asa king of 
Judah. 2Then Asa brought out silver 
and gold out of the treasures of the 
house of the LORD and of the king’s 
house, and sent to Ben-hadad king of 
Aram, that dwelt at aDamascus, 
saying: 3’There is a league between me 
and thee, as there was between my 
father and thy father; behold, I have 
sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy 
league with Baasa king of Israel, that 
he may depart from me.’ 4And Ben-
hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and 
sent the captains of his armies against 
the cities of Israel; and they smote 
Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and all 
the store-cities of Naphtali. 5And it 
came to pass, when Baasa heard 

a Heb. Darmesek, and in xxiv 23; 
xxviii, 5, 23. 


thereof, that he left off building 
Ramah, and let his work cease. 6Then 
Asa the king took all Judah; and they 
carried away the stones of Ramah, and 
the timber thereof, wherewith Baasa 
had builded; and he built therewith 
Geba and Mizpah. 

7And at that time Hanani the seer 
came to Asa king of Judah, and said 
unto him: ‘Because thou hast relied on 
the king of Aram, and hast not relied 
on the LORD thy God, therefore is the 
host of the king of Aram escaped out 
of thy hand. 8Were not the Ethiopians 
and the Lubim a huge host, with 
chariots and horsemen exceeding 
many? yet, because thou didst rely on 
the LORD, He delivered them into thy 
hand. 9For the eyes of the LORD run to 
and fro throughout the whole earth, to 
show Himself strong in the behalf of 
them whose heart is whole toward 
Him. Herein thou hast done foolishly; 
for from henceforth thou shalt have 
wars.’ 10Then Asa was wroth with the 
seer, and put him in the prison-house; 
for he was in a rage with him because 
of this thing. And Asa oppressed some 
of the people the same time. 

11And, behold, the acts of Asa, first 
and last, lo, they are written in the 
book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
12And in the thirty and ninth year of 
his reign Asa was diseased in his feet; 
his disease was exceeding great; yet in 
his disease he sought not to the LORD, 
but to the physicians. 13And Asa slept 
with his fathers, and died in the one 
and fortieth year of his reign. 14And 
they buried him in his own sepulchres, 
which he had hewn out for himself in 
the city of David, and laid him in the 
bed which was filled with sweet 
odours and divers kinds [of spices] 
prepared by the perfumers’art; and 
they made a very great burning for 
him. 

And Jehoshaphat his son 
reigned in his stead, and 
strengthened himself against Israel. 
2And he placed forces in all the 
fortified cities of Judah, and set 
garrisons in the land of Judah, and in 
the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his 
father had taken. 3And the LORD was 
with Jehoshaphat, because he walked 
in the first ways of his father David, 
and sought not unto the Baalim; 4but 
sought to the God of his father, and 
walked in His commandments, and not 
after the doings of Israel. 5Therefore 
the LORD established the kingdom in 
his hand; and all Judah brought to 
Jehoshaphat presents; and he had 
riches and honour in abundance. 6And 
his heart was lifted up in the ways of 
the LORD; and furthermore he took 
away the high places and the Asherim 
out of Judah. 

7Also in the third year of his reign 
he sent his princes, even Ben-hail, and 
Obadiah, and Zechariah, and Nethanel, 
and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of 
Judah; 8and with them the Levites, 
even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and 
Zebadiah, and Asahel, and 
Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and 
Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob-
17 




adonijah, the Levites; and with them 
Elishama and Jehoram, the priests. 
9And they taught in Judah, having the 
book of the Law of the LORD with 
them; and they went about throughout 
all the cities of Judah, and taught 
among the people. 

10And a terror from the LORD fell 
upon all the kingdoms of the lands that 
were round about Judah, so that they 
made no war against Jehoshaphat. 
11And some of the Philistines brought 
Jehoshaphat presents, and silver for 
tribute; the Arabians also brought him 
flocks, seven thousand and seven 
hundred rams, and seven thousand and 
seven hundred he-goats. 12And 
Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; 
and he built in Judah castles and cities 
of store. 13And he had many works in 
the cities of Judah; and men of war, 
mighty men of valour, in Jerusalem. 
14And this was the numbering of them 
according to their fathers’houses: of 
Judah, the captains of thousands: 
Adnah the captain, and with him 
mighty men of valour three hundred 
thousand; 15and next to him Jehohanan 
the captain, and with him two hundred 
and fourscore thousand; 16and next to 
him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who 
willingly offered himself unto the 
LORD, and with him two hundred 
thousand mighty men of valour; 17and 
of Benjamin: Eliada a mighty man of 
valour, and with him two hundred 
thousand armed with bow and shield; 
18and next to him Jehozabad, and with 
him a hundred and fourscore thousand 
ready prepared for war. 19These were 
they that waited on the king beside 
those whom the king put in the 
fortified cities throughout all Judah. 

Now Jehoshaphat had riches 
and honour in abundance; and 
he allied himself with Ahab by 
marriage. 2And after a lapse of years 
he went down to Ahab to Samaria. 
And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for 
him in abundance, and for the people 
that were with him, and persuaded him 
to go up with him to Ramoth-gilead. 
3And Ahab king of Israel said unto 
Jehoshaphat king of Judah: ‘Wilt thou 
go with me to Ramoth-gilead?’ And he 
answered him: ‘I am as thou art, and 
my people as thy people; and we will 
be with thee in the war.’ 

4And Jehoshaphat said unto the king 
of Israel: ‘Inquire, I pray thee, at the 
word of the LORD today.’ 5Then the 
king of Israel gathered the prophets 
together, four hundred men, and said 
unto them: ‘Shall we go to Ramoth-
gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?’ 
And they said: ‘Go up; for God will 
deliver it into the hand of the king.’ 
6But Jehoshaphat said: ‘Is there not 
here besides a prophet of the LORD, 
that we might inquire of him?’ 7And 
the king of Israel said unto 
Jehoshaphat: ‘There is yet one man by 
whom we may inquire of the LORD; but 
I hate him; for he never prophesieth 
good concerning me, but always evil; 
the same is Micaiah the son of Imla.’ 
And Jehoshaphat said: ‘Let not the 
king say so.’ 8Then the king of Israel 
18 




called an officer, and said: ‘Fetch 
quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.’ 
9Now the king of Israel and 
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each 
on his throne, arrayed in their robes, 
and they sat in a threshing-floor at the 
entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all 
the prophets were prophesying before 
them. 10And Zedekiah the son of 
Chenaanah made him horns of iron, 
and said: ‘Thus saith the LORD: With 
these shalt thou gore the Arameans, 
until they be consumed.’ 11And all the 
prophets prophesied so, saying: ‘Go up 
to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the 
LORD will deliver it into the hand of the 
king.’ 

12And the messenger that went to 
call Micaiah spoke to him, saying: 
‘Behold, the words of the prophets 
declare good to the king with one 
mouth; let thy word therefore, I pray 
thee, be like one of theirs, and speak 
thou good.’ 13And Micaiah said: ‘As 
the LORD liveth, what my God saith, 
that will I speak.’ 14And when he was 
come to the king, the king said unto 
him: ‘aMicaiah, shall we go to 
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I 
forbear?’ And he said: ‘Go ye up, and 
prosper; and they shall be delivered 
into your hand.’ 15And the king said to 
him: ‘How many times shall I adjure 
thee that thou speak unto me nothing 
but the truth in the name of the LORD.’ 
16And he said: ‘I saw all Israel 
scattered upon the mountains, as sheep 

a Heb. Micah. 

that have no shepherd; and the LORD 
said: These have no master, let them 
return every man to his house in 
peace.’ 17And the king of Israel said to 
Jehoshaphat: ‘Did I not tell thee that 
he would not prophesy good 
concerning me, but evil?’ 18And he 
said: ‘Therefore hear ye the word of 
the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting upon 
His throne, and all the host of heaven 
standing on His right hand and on His 
left. 19And the LORD said: who shall 
entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may 
go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And 
one spoke saying after this manner, 
and another saying after that manner. 
20And there came forth the spirit, and 
stood before the LORD, and said: I will 
entice him. And the LORD said unto 
him: Wherewith? 21And he said: I will 
go forth, and will be a lying spirit in 
the mouth of all his prophets. And He 
said: Thou shalt entice him, and shalt 
prevail also; go forth, and do so. 
22Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath 
put a lying spirit in the mouth of these 
thy prophets; and the LORD hath 
spoken evil concerning thee.’ 

23Then Zedekiah the son of 
Chenaanah came near, and smote 
Micaiah upon the check, and said: 
‘Which way went the spirit of the 
LORD from me to speak unto thee?’ 
24And Micaiah said: ‘Behold, thou 
shalt see on that day, when thou shalt 
go into an inner chamber to hide 
thyself.’ 25And the king of Israel said: 
‘Take ye Micaiah; and carry him back 
unto Amon the governor of the city, 


and to Joash the king’s son; 26and say: 
Thus saith the king: Put this fellow in 
the prison, and feed him with scant 
bread and with scant water, until I 
return in peace.’ 27And Micaiah said: 
‘If thou return at all in peace, the LORD 
hath not spoken by me.’ And he said: 
‘Hear, ye peoples, all of you.’ 

28So the king of Israel and 
Jehoshaphat the kind of Judah went up 
to Ramoth-gilead. 29And the king of 
Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: ‘I will 
disguise myself, and go into the battle; 
but put thou on thy robes.’ So the king 
of Israel disguised himself; and they 
went into the battle. 30Now the king of 
Aram had commanded the captains of 
his chariots, saying: ‘Fight neither 
with small nor great, save only with 
the king of Israel.’ 31And it came to 
pass, when the captains of the chariots 
saw Jehoshaphat, that they said: ‘It is 
the king of Israel.’ Therefore they 
turned about to fight against him; but 
Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD 
helped him; and God moved them to 
depart from him. 32And it came to 
pass, when the captains of the chariots 
saw that it was not the king of Israel, 
that they turned back from pursuing 
him. 33And a certain man drew his bow 
at a venture, and smote the king of 
Israel between the lower armour and 
the breastplate; wherefore he said to 
the driver of the chariot: ‘Turn thy 
hand, and carry me out of the host; for 
I am sore wounded.’ 34And the battle 
increased that day; howbeit the king of 
Israel stayed himself up in his chariot 
against the Arameans until the even; 
and about the time of the going down 
of the sun he died. 

And Jehoshaphat the king of 
Judah returned to his house in 
peace to Jerusalem. 2And Jehu the son 
of Hanani the seer went out to meet 
him, and said to king Jehoshaphat: 
‘Shouldest thou help the wicked, and 
love them that hate the LORD? for this 
thing wrath is upon thee from before 
the LORD. 3Nevertheless there are good 
things found in thee, in that thou hast 
put away the Asheroth out of the land, 
and hast set thy heart to seek God.’ 

4And Jehoshaphat dwelt at 
Jerusalem; and he went out again 
among the people from Beer-sheba to 
the hill-country of Ephraim, and 
brought them back unto the LORD, the 
God of their fathers. 5And he set 
judges in the land throughout all the 
fortified cities of Judah, city by city, 
6and said to the judges: ‘Consider what 
ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for 
the LORD; and [He is] with you in 
giving judgment. 7Now therefore let 
the fear of the LORD be upon you; take 
heed and do it; for there is no iniquity 
with the LORD our God, nor respect of 
persons, nor taking of bribes.’ 
8Moreover in Jerusalem did 
Jehoshaphat set of the Levites and the 
priests, and of the heads of the 
fathers’houses of Israel, for the 
judgment of the LORD, and for 
controversies. And they returned to 
Jerusalem. 9And he charged them, 
saying: ‘Thus shall ye do in the fear of 
19 




the LORD, faithfully, and with a whole 
heart. 10And whensoever any 
controversy shall come to you from 
your brethren that dwell in their cities, 
between blood and blood, between law 
and commandment, statutes and 
ordinances, ye shall warn them, that 
they be not guilty towards the LORD, 
and so wrath come upon you and upon 
your brethren; thus shall ye do, and ye 
shall not be guilty. 11And, behold, 
Amariah the chief priest is over you in 
all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah 
the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the 
house of Judah, in all the king’s 
matters; also the officers of the Levites 
before you. Deal courageously, and the 
LORD be with the good.’ 

And it came to pass after this, 
that the children of Moab, and 
the children of Ammon, and with them 
some of the Ammonites, came against 
Jehoshaphat to battle. 2Then there 
came some that told Jehoshaphat, 
saying: ‘There cometh a great 
multitude against thee from beyond the 
sea from Aram; and, behold, they are 
in Hazazon-tamar’—the same is En-
gedi. 3And Jehoshaphat feared, and set 
himself to seek unto the LORD; and he 
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. 
4And Judah gathered themselves 
together, to seek help of the LORD; 
even out of all the cities of Judah they 
came to seek the LORD. 5And 
Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation 
of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house 
of the LORD, before the new court; 6and 
he said: ‘O LORD, the God of our 
fathers, art not Thou alone God in 
heaven? and art not Thou ruler over all 
the kingdoms of the nations? and in 
Thy hand is power and might, so that 
none is able to withstand Thee. 7Didst 
not Thou, O our God, drive out the 
inhabitants of this land before Thy 
people Israel, and gavest it to the seed 
of Abraham Thy friend for ever? 8And 
they dwelt therein, and have built Thee 
a sanctuary therein for Thy name, 
saying: 9If evil come upon us, the 
sword, judgment, or pestilence, or 
famine, we will stand before this 
house, and before Thee—for Thy 
name is in this house—and cry unto 
Thee in our affliction, and Thou wilt 
hear and save. 10And now, behold, the 
children of Ammon and Moab and 
mount Seir, whom Thou wouldest not 
let Israel invade, when they came out 
of the land of Egypt, but they turned 
aside from them, and destroyed them 
not; 11behold, they render unto us 
[evil], to come to cast us out of Thy 
possession, which Thou hast given us 
to inherit. 12O our God, wilt Thou not 
execute judgment on them? for we 
have no might against this great 
multitude that cometh against us; 
neither know we what to do; but our 
eyes are upon Thee.’ 13And all Judah 
stood before the LORD, with their little 
ones, their wives, and their children. 
14Then upon Jahaziel the son of 
Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son 
of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, the 
Levite, of the sons of Asaph, came the 
spirit of the LORD in the midst of the 
20 




congregation; 15and he said: ‘Hearken 
ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat: 
thus saith the LORD unto you: Fear not 
ye, neither be dismayed by reason of 
this great multitude; for the battle is 
not yours, but God’s. 16To-morrow go 
ye down against them; behold, they 
come up by the ascent of Ziz; and ye 
shall find them at the end of the valley, 
before the wilderness of Jeruel. 17Ye 
shall not need to fight in this battle; set 
yourselves, stand ye still, and see the 
salvation of the LORD with you, O 
Judah and Jerusalem; fear not, nor be 
dismayed; to-morrow go out against 
them; for the LORD is with you.’ 18And 
Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his 
face to the ground; and all Judah and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down 
before the LORD, worshipping the 
LORD. 19And the Levites, of the 
children of the Kohathites and of the 
children of the Korahites, stood up to 
praise the LORD, the God of Israel, with 
an exceeding loud voice. 

20And they rose early in the morning, 
and went forth into the wilderness of 
Tekoa; and as they went forth, 
Jehoshaphat stood and said: ‘Hear me, 
O Judah, and ye inhabitants of 
Jerusalem; believe in the LORD your 
God, so shall ye be established; 
believe His prophets, so shall ye 
prosper.’ 21And when he had taken 
counsel with the people, he appointed 
them that should sing unto the LORD, 
and praise in the beauty of holiness, as 
they went out before the army, and 
say: ‘Give thanks unto the LORD, for 
His mercy endureth for ever.’ 22And 
when they began to sing and to praise, 
the LORD set liers-in-wait against the 
children of Ammon, Moab, and mount 
Seir, that were come against Judah; 
and they were smitten. 23For the 
children of Ammon and Moab stood 
up against the inhabitants of mount 
Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them; 
and when they had made an end of the 
inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to 
destroy another. 

24And when Judah came to the watch-
tower of the wilderness, they looked 
upon the multitude; and, behold, they 
were dead bodies fallen to the earth, 
and there were none that escaped. 
25And when Jehoshaphat and his 
people came to take the spoil of them, 
they found among them in abundance 
both riches and dead bodies, and 
precious jewels, which they stripped 
off for themselves, more than they 
could carry away; and they were three 
days in taking the spoil, it was so 
much. 26And on the fourth day they 
assembled themselves in the valley of 
aBeracah; for there they blessed the 
LORD; therefore the name of that place 
was called The valley of Beracah, unto 
this day. 27Then they returned, every 
man of Judah and Jerusalem, and 
Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, 
to go back to Jerusalem with joy; for 
the LORD had made them to rejoice 
over their enemies. 28And they came to 

a That is, Blessing. 


Jerusalem with psalteries and harps 
and trumpets unto the house of the 
LORD. 29And a terror from God was on 
all the kingdoms of the countries, 
when they heard that the LORD fought 
against the enemies of Israel. 30So the 
realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet; for his 
God gave him rest round about. 

31And Jehoshaphat reigned over 
Judah; he was thirty and five years old 
when he began to reign; and he 
reigned twenty and five years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 32And 
he walked in the way of Asa his father, 
and turned not aside from it, doing that 
which was right in the eyes of the 
LORD. 33Howbeit the high places were 
not taken away; neither as yet had the 
people set their hearts unto the God of 
their fathers. 34Now the rest of the acts 
of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, 
they are written in the words of Jehu 
the son of Hanani, which is inserted in 
the book of the kings of Israel. 

35And after this did Jehoshaphat 
king of Judah join himself with 
Ahaziah king of Israel; the same did 
very wickedly; 36and he joined him 
with himself to make ships to go to 
Tarshish; and they made the ships in 
Ezion-geber. 37Then Eliezer the son of 
Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied 
against Jehoshaphat, saying: ‘Because 
thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, 
the LORD hath made a breach in thy 
works.’ And the ships were broken, 
that they were not able to go to 
Tarshish. 

And Jehoshaphat slept with his 
fathers, and was buried with 
his fathers in the city of David; and 
Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. 
2And he had brethren the sons of 
Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and 
Zechariah, and Azariahu, and Michael, 
and Shephatiah; all these were the sons 
of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 3And 
their father gave them great gifts, of 
silver, and of gold, and of precious 
things, with fortified cities in Judah; 
but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram, 
because he was the first-born. 4Now 
when Jehoram was risen up over the 
kingdom of his father, and had 
strengthened himself, he slew all his 
brethren with the sword, and divers 
also of the princes of Israel. 5Jehoram 
was thirty and two years old when he 
began to reign; and he reigned eight 
years in Jerusalem. 6And he walked in 
the way of the kings of Israel, as did 
the house of Ahab; for he had the 
daughter of Ahab to wife; and he did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD. 7Howbeit the LORD would not 
destroy the house of David, because of 
the covenant that He had made with 
David, and as He promised to give a 
lamp to him and to his children alway. 
8In his days Edom revolted from 
under the hand of Judah, and made a 
king over themselves. 9Then Jehoram 
passed over with his captains, and all 
his chariots with him; and he rose up 
by night, and smote the Edomites that 
compassed him about, and the captains 
of the chariots. 10So Edom revolted 
21 




from under the hand of Judah unto this 
day; then did Libnah revolt at the same 
time from under his hand; because he 
had forsaken the LORD, the God of his 
fathers. 11Moreover he made high 
places in the mountains of Judah, and 
made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to 
go astray, and drew Judah away. 12And 
there came a writing to him from 
Elijah the prophet, saying: ‘Thus saith 
the LORD, the God of David thy father: 
Because thou hast not walked in the 
ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in 
the ways of Asa king of Judah; 13but 
hast walked in the way of the kings of 
Israel, and hast made Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to go astray, 
like as the house of Ahab made [Israel] 
to go astray; and also hast slain thy 
brethren of thy father’s house, who 
were better than thyself; 14behold, the 
LORD will smite with a great plague thy 
people, and thy children, and thy 
wives, and all thy substance; 15and 
thou shalt have great sickness by 
disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels 
fall out by reason of the sickness, day 
by day.’ 

16And the LORD stirred up against 
Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, 
and of the Arabians that are beside the 
Ethiopians; 17and they came up against 
Judah, and broke into it, and carried 
away all the substance that was found 
in the king’s house, and his sons also, 
and his wives; so that there was never 
a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the 
youngest of his sons. 

18And after all this the LORD smote 
him in his bowels with an incurable 
disease. 19And it came to pass, that in 
process of time, at the end of two 
years, his bowels fell out by reason of 
his sickness, and he died of sore 
diseases. And his people made no 
burning for him, like the burning of his 
fathers. 20Thirty and two years old was 
he when he began to reign, and he 
reigned in Jerusalem eight years; and 
he departed joyless; and they buried 
him in the city of David, but not in the 
sepulchres of the kings. 

And the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem made Ahaziah his 
youngest son king in his stead; for the 
band of men that came with the 
Arabians to the camp had slain all the 
eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram 
king of Judah reigned. 2Forty and two 
years old was Ahaziah when he began 
to reign; and he reigned one year in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 3He 
also walked in the ways of the house 
of Ahab; for his mother was his 
counsellor to do wickedly. 4And he did 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD, as did the house of Ahab; for 
they were his counsellors after the 
death of his father, to his destruction. 
5He walked also after their counsel, 
and went with Jehoram the son of 
Ahab king of Israel to war against 
Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-
gilead; and the Arameans wounded 
Joram. 6And he returned to be healed 
in Jezreel of the wounds which they 
22 




had given him at Ramah, when he 
fought against Hazael king of Aram. 
And Azariah the son of Jehoram king 
of Judah went down to see Jehoram 
the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he 
was sick. 

7Now the downfall of Ahaziah was 
of God, in that he went unto Joram; for 
when he was come, he went out with 
Jehoram against Jehu the son of 
Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed 
to cut off the house of Ahab. 8And it 
came to pass, when Jehu was 
executing judgment upon the house of 
Ahab, that he found the princes of 
Judah, and the sons of the brethren of 
Ahaziah, ministering to Ahaziah, and 
slew them. 9And he sought Ahaziah, 
and they caught him—now he was 
hiding in Samaria—and they brought 
him to Jehu, and slew him; and they 
buried him, for they said: ‘He is the 
son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the 
LORD with all his heart.’ And there was 
none of the house of Ahaziah that had 
power to hold the kingdom. 

10Now when Athaliah the mother of 
Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, 
she arose and destroyed all the seed 
royal of the house of Judah. 11But 
Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, 
took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and 
stole him away from among the king’s 
sons that were slain, and put him and 
his nurse in the bed-chamber. So 
Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king 
Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the 
priest—for she was the sister of 
Ahaziah—hid him from Athaliah, so 
that she slew him not. 12And he was 
with them hid in the house of God six 
years; and Athaliah reigned over the 
land. 

And in the seventh year 
Jehoiada strengthened himself, 
and took the captains of hundreds, 
Azariah the son of Jeroham, and 
Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and 
Azariah the son of Obed, and 
Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and 
Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into 
covenant with him. 2And they went 
about in Judah, and gathered the 
Levites out of all the cities of Judah, 
and the heads of fathers’houses of 
Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 
3And all the congregation made a 
covenant with the king in the house of 
God. And he said unto them: ‘Behold, 
the king’s son shall reign, as the LORD 
hath spoken concerning the sons of 
David. 4This is the thing that ye shall 
do: a third part of you, that come in on 
the sabbath, of the priests and of the 
Levites, shall be porters of the doors; 
5and a third part shall be at the king’s 
house; and a third part at the gate of 
the foundation; and all the people shall 
be in the courts of the house of the 
LORD. 6But let none come into the 
house of the LORD, save the priests, 
and they that minister of the Levites; 
they shall come in, for they are holy; 
but all the people shall keep the charge 
of the LORD. 7And the Levites shall 
compass the king round about, every 
man with his weapons in his hand; and 
whosoever cometh into the house, let 
23 




him be slain; and be ye with the king 
when he cometh in, and when he goeth 
out.’ 

8So the Levites and all Judah did 
according to all that Jehoiada the priest 
commanded; and they took every man 
his men, those that were to come in on 
the sabbath, with those that were to go 
out on the sabbath; for Jehoiada the 
priest dismissed not the courses. 9And 
Jehoiada the priest delivered to the 
captains of hundreds the spears, and 
bucklers, and shields, that had been 
king David’s, which were in the house 
of God. 10And he set all the people, 
every man with his weapon in his 
hand, from the right side of the house 
to the left side of the house, along by 
the altar and the house, by the king 
round about. 11Then they brought out 
the king’s son, and put upon him the 
crown and the insignia, and made him 
king; and Jehoiada and his sons 
anointed him; and they said: ‘Long 
live the king.’ 

12And when Athaliah heard the 
noise of the people running and 
praising the king, she came to the 
people into the house of the LORD; 
13and she looked, and, behold, the king 
stood on his platform at the entrance, 
and the captains and the trumpets by 
the king; and all the people of the land 
rejoiced, and blew with trumpets; the 
singers also [played] on instruments of 
music, and led the singing of praise. 
Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and 
said: ‘Treason, treason.’ 14And 
Jehoiada the priest brought out the 
captains of hundreds that were set over 
the host, and said unto them: ‘Have 
her forth between the ranks; and 
whoso followeth her, let him be slain 
with the sword’; for the priest said: 
‘Slay her not in the house of the LORD.’ 
15So they made way for her; and she 
went to the entry of the horse gate to 
the king’s house; and they slew her 
there. 

16And Jehoiada made a covenant 
between himself, and all the people, 
and the king, that they should be the 
LORD’S people. 17And all the people 
went to the house of Baal, and broke it 
down, and broke his altars and his 
images in pieces, and slew Mattan the 
priest of Baal before the altars. 18And 
Jehoiada appointed the offices of the 
house of the LORD under the hand of 
the priests the Levites, whom David 
had distributed in the house of the 
LORD, to offer the burnt-offerings of 
the LORD, as it is written in the Law of 
Moses, with rejoicing and with 
singing, according to the direction of 
David. 19And he set the porters at the 
gates of the house of the LORD, that 
none that was unclean in any thing 
should enter in. 20And he took the 
captains of hundreds, and the nobles, 
and the governors of the people, and 
all the people of the land, and brought 
down the king from the house of the 
LORD; and they came through the upper 
gate unto the king’s house, and set the 
king upon the throne of the kingdom. 
21So all the people of the land rejoiced, 


and the city was quiet; and they slew 
Athaliah with the sword. 

Joash was seven years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; 
and his mother’s name was Zibiah of 
Beer-sheba. 2And Joash did that which 
was right in the eyes of the LORD all 
the days of Jehoiada the priest. 3And 
Jehoiada took for him two wives; and 
he begot sons and daughters. 

4And it came to pass after this, that 
Joash was minded to restore the house 
of the LORD. 5And he gathered together 
the priests and the Levites, and said to 
them: ‘Go out unto the cities of Judah, 
and gather of all Israel money to repair 
the house of your God from year to 
year, and see that ye hasten the 
matter.’ Howbeit the Levites hastened 
it not. 6And the king called for 
Jehoiada the chief, and unto him: 
‘Why hast thou not required of the 
Levites to bring in out of Judah and 
out of Jerusalem the tax of Moses the 
servant of the LORD, and of the 
congregation of Israel, for the tent of 
the testimony?’ 7For the sons of 
Athaliah, that wicked woman, had 
broken up the house of God; and also 
all the hallowed things of the house of 
the LORD did they bestow upon the 
Baalim. 

8So the king commanded, and they 
made a chest, and set it without at the 
gate of the house of the LORD. 9And 
they made a proclamation through 
Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in for 
the LORD the tax that Moses the servant 
of God laid upon Israel in the 
wilderness. 10And all the princes and 
all the people rejoiced, and brought in, 
and cast into the chest, until they had 
made an end. 11And it was so, that at 
what time the chest was brought unto 
the king’s officers by the hand of the 
Levites, and when they saw that there 
was much money, the king’s scribe 
and the chief priest’s officer came and 
emptied the chest, and took it, and 
carried it back to its place. Thus they 
did day by day, and gathered money in 
abundance. 12And the king and 
Jehoiada gave it to such as did the 
work of the service of the house of the 
LORD; and they hired masons and 
carpenters to restore the house of the 
LORD, and also such as wrought iron 
and brass to repair the house of the 
LORD. 13So the workmen wrought, and 
the work was perfected by them, and 
they set up the house of God in its 
state, and strengthened it. 14And when 
they had made an end, they brought 
the rest of the money before the king 
and Jehoiada, whereof were made 
vessels for the house of the LORD, even 
vessels wherewith to minister, and 
buckets, and pans, and vessels of gold 
and silver. And they offered burnt-
offerings in the house of the LORD 
continually all the days of Jehoiada. 

15But Jehoiada waxed old and was 
full of days, and he died; a hundred 
and thirty years old was he when he 
died. 16And they buried him in the city 
of David among the kings, because he 
had done good in Israel, and toward 
24 




God and His house. 17Now after the 
death of Jehoiada came the princes of 
Judah, and prostrated themselves 
before the king. Then the king 
hearkened unto them. 18And they 
forsook the house of the LORD, the God 
of their fathers, and served the 
Asherim and the idols; and wrath came 
upon Judah and Jerusalem for this 
their guiltiness. 19Yet He sent prophets 
to them, to bring them back unto the 
LORD; and they admonished them, but 
they would not give ear. 

20And the spirit of God clothed 
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the 
priest; and he stood above the people, 
and said unto them: ‘Thus saith God: 
Why transgress ye the commandments 
of the LORD, that ye cannot prosper? 
because ye have forsaken the LORD, He 
hath also forsaken you.’ 21And they 
conspired against him, and stoned him 
with stones at the commandment of 
the king in the court of the house of 
the LORD. 22Thus Joash the king 
remembered not the kindness which 
Jehoiada his father had done to him, 
but slew his son. And when he died, he 
said: ‘The LORD look upon it, and 
require it.’ 

23And it came to pass, when the year 
was come about, that the army of the 
Arameans came up against him; and 
they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and 
destroyed all the princes of the people 
from among the people, and sent all 
the spoil of them unto the king of 
Damascus. 24For the army of the 
Arameans came with a small company 
of men; and the LORD delivered a very 
great host into their hand, because they 
had forsaken the LORD, the God of 
their fathers. So they executed 
judgment upon Joash. 25And when 
they were departed from him—for 
they left him in great diseases—his 
own servants conspired against him for 
the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the 
priest, and slew him on his bed, and he 
died; and they buried him in the city of 
David, but they buried him not in the 
sepulchres of the kings. 26And these 
are they that conspired against him: 
Zabad the son of Shimeath the 
Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of 
Shimrith the Moabitess. 27Now 
concerning his sons, and the multitude 
of the burdens against him, and the 
rebuilding of the house of God, 
behold, they are written in the 
commentary of the book of the kings. 
And Amaziah his son reigned in his 
stead. 

Amaziah was twenty and five 
years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned twenty and nine 
years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s 
name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 
2And he did that which was right in the 
eyes of the LORD, but not with a whole 
heart. 3Now it came to pass, when the 
kingdom was established unto him, 
that he slew his servants who had 
killed the king his father. 4But he put 
not their children to death, but did 
according to that which is written in 
the law in the book of Moses, as the 
LORD commanded, saying: ‘The fathers 
25 




shall not die for the children, neither 
shall the children die for the fathers; 
but every man shall die for his own 
sin.’ 

5Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah 
together, and ordered them according 
to their fathers’houses, under captains 
of thousands and captains of hundreds, 
even all Judah and Benjamin; and he 
numbered them from twenty years old 
and upward, and found them three 
hundred thousand chosen men, able to 
go forth to war, that could handle 
spear and shield. 6He hired also a 
hundred thousand mighty men of 
valour out of Israel for a hundred 
talents of silver. 7But there came a man 
of God to him, saying: ‘O king, let not 
the army of Israel go with thee; for the 
LORD is not with Israel, even with all 
the children of Ephraim. 8But if thou 
wilt go, and do engage never so 
valiantly in battle, God will cast thee 
down before the enemy; for God hath 
power to help, and to cast down.’ 9And 
Amaziah said to the man of God: ‘But 
what shall we do for the hundred 
talents which I have given to the army 
of Israel?’ And the man of God 
answered: ‘The LORD is able to give 
thee much more than this.’ 10Then 
Amaziah separated them, to wit, the 
army that was come to him out of 
Ephraim, to go back home; wherefore 
their anger was greatly kindled against 
Judah, and they returned home in 
fierce anger. 

11And Amaziah took courage, and 
led forth his people, and went to the 
Valley of Salt, and smote of the 
children of Seir ten thousand. 12And 
other ten thousand did the children of 
Judah carry away alive, and brought 
them unto the top of the Rock, and cast 
them down from the top of the Rock, 
that they all were broken in pieces. 
13But the men of the army whom 
Amaziah sent back, that they should 
not go with him to battle, fell upon the 
cities of Judah, from Samaria even 
unto Beth-horon, and smote of them 
three thousand, and took much spoil. 

14Now it came to pass, after that 
Amaziah was come from the slaughter 
of the Edomites, that he brought the 
gods of the children of Seir, and set 
them up to be his gods, and prostrated 
himself before them, and offered unto 
them. 15Wherefore the anger of the 
LORD was kindled against Amaziah, 
and He sent unto him a prophet, who 
said unto him: ‘Why hast thou sought 
after the gods of the people, which 
have not delivered their own people 
out of thy hand?’ 16And it came to 
pass, as he talked with him, that [the 
king] said unto him: ‘Have we made 
thee of the king’s counsel? forbear; 
why shouldest thou be smitten?’ Then 
the prophet forbore, and said: ‘I know 
that God hath determined to destroy 
thee, because thou hast done this, and 
hast not hearkened unto my counsel.’ 

17Then Amaziah king of Judah took 
advice, and sent to Joash, the son of 
Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, king of 
Israel, saying: ‘Come, let us look one 
another in the face.’ 18And Joash king 


of Israel sent to Amaziah king of 
Judah, saying: ‘The thistle that was in 
Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in 
Lebanon, saying: Give thy daughter to 
my son to wife; and there passed by 
the wild beasts that were in Lebanon, 
and trod down the thistle. 19Thou 
sayest—lo, thou hast smitten Edom; 
will thy heart therefore lift thee up to 
glory therein? abide now at home; why 
shouldest thou meddle with evil, that 
thou shouldest fall, even thou, and 
Judah with thee?’ 20But Amaziah 
would not hear; for it was of God, that 
He might deliver them into the hand 
[of their enemies], because they had 
sought after the gods of Edom. 21So 
Joash king of Israel went up; and he 
and Amaziah king of Judah looked one 
another in the face at Beth-shemesh, 
which belongeth to Judah. 22And Judah 
was put to the worse before Israel; and 
they fled every man to his tent. 23And 
Joash king of Israel took Amaziah 
king of Judah, the son of Joash, the 
son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-shemesh, and 
brought him to Jerusalem, and broke 
down the wall of Jerusalem from the 
gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, 
four hundred cubits. 24And [he took] 
all the gold and silver, and all the 
vessels that were found in the house of 
God with Obed-edom, and the 
treasures of the king’s house, the 
hostages also, and returned to Samaria. 

25And Amaziah the son of Joash 
king of Judah lived after the death of 
Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel 
fifteen years. 26Now the rest of the acts 
of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are 
they not written in the book of the 
kings of Judah and Israel? 27Now from 
the time that Amaziah did turn away 
from following the LORD they made a 
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; 
and he fled to Lachish; but they sent 
after him to Lachish, and slew him 
there. 28And they brought him upon 
horses, and buried him with his fathers 
in the city of Judah. 

And all the people of Judah 
took Uzziah, who was sixteen 
years old, and made him king in the 
room of his father Amaziah. 2He built 
Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after 
that the king slept with his fathers. 
3Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he 
began to reign; and he reigned fifty 
and two years in Jerusalem; and his 
mother’s name was Jecoliah of 
Jerusalem. 4And he did that, which 
was right in the eyes of the LORD, 
according to all that his father 
Amaziah had done. 5And he set 
himself to seek God in the days of 
Zechariah, who had understanding in 
the vision of God; and as long as he 
sought the LORD, God made him to 
prosper. 

6And he went forth and warred 
against the Philistines, and broke down 
the wall of Gath, and the wall of 
Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod; and 
he built cities in [the country of] 
Ashdod, and among the Philistines. 
7And God helped him against the 
Philistines, and against the Arabians 
that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the 
26 




Meunim. 8And the Ammonites gave 
gifts to Uzziah; and his name spread 
abroad even to the entrance of Egypt; 
for he waxed exceeding strong. 
9Moreover Uzziah built towers in 
Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the 
valley gate, and at the Turning, and 
fortified them. 10And be built towers in 
the wilderness, and hewed out many 
cisterns, for he had much cattle; in the 
Lowland also, and in the table-land; 
and he had husbandmen and 
vinedressers in the mountains and in 
the fruitful fields; for he loved 
husbandry. 

11Moreover Uzziah had an army of 
fighting men, that went out to war by 
bands, according to the number of 
their reckoning made by Jeiel the 
scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under 
the hand of Hananiah, one of the 
king’s captains. 12The whole number 
of the heads of fathers’houses, even 
the mighty men of valour, was two 
thousand and six hundred. 13And under 
their hand was a trained army, three 
hundred thousand and seven thousand 
and five hundred, that made war with 
mighty power, to help the king against 
the enemy. 14And Uzziah prepared for 
them, even for all the host, shields, and 
spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, 
and bows, and stones for slinging. 
15And he made in Jerusalem engines, 
invented by skilful men, to be on the 
towers and upon the corners, 
wherewith to shoot arrows and great 
stones. And his name spread far 
abroad; for he was marvellously 
helped, till he was strong. 

16But when he was strong, his heart 
was lifted up so that he did corruptly, 
and he trespassed against the LORD his 
God; for he went into the temple of the 
LORD to burn incense upon the altar of 
incense. 17And Azariah the priest went 
in after him, and with him fourscore 
priests of the LORD, that were valiant 
men; 18and they withstood Uzziah the 
king, and said unto him: ‘It pertaineth 
not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense 
unto the LORD, but to the priests the 
sons of Aaron that are consecrated it 
pertaineth to burn incense; go out of 
the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; 
neither shall it be for thy honour from 
the LORD God.’ 19Then Uzziah was 
wroth; and he had a censer in his hand 
to burn incense; and while he was 
wroth with the priests, the leprosy 
broke forth in his forehead before the 
priests in the house of the LORD, beside 
the altar of incense. 20And Azariah the 
chief priest, and all the priests, looked 
upon him, and, behold, he was leprous 
in his forehead, and they thrust him 
out quickly from thence; yea, himself 
made haste also to go out, because the 
LORD had smitten him. 21And Uzziah 
the king was a leper unto the day of his 
death, and dwelt in a house set apart, 
being a leper; for he was cut off from 
the house of the LORD; and Jotham his 
son was over the king’s house, judging 
the people of the land. 22Now the rest 
of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did 
Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, 


write. 23So Uzziah slept with his 
fathers; and they buried him with his 
fathers in the field of burial which 
belonged to the kings; for they said: 
‘He is a leper’; and Jotham his son 
reigned in his stead. 

Jotham was twenty and five 
years old when he began to 
reign; and he reigned sixteen years in 
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was 
Jerushah the daughter of Zadok. 2And 
he did that which was right in the eyes 
of the LORD, according to all that his 
father Uzziah had done; howbeit he 
entered not into the temple of the 
LORD. And the people did yet 
corruptly. 3He built the upper gate of 
the house of the LORD, and on the wall 
of Ophel he built much. 4Moreover he 
built cities in the hill-country of Judah, 
and in the forest he built castles and 
towers. 5He fought also with the king 
of the children of Ammon, and 
prevailed against them. And the 
children of Ammon gave him the same 
year a hundred talents of silver, and 
ten thousand measures of wheat, and 
ten thousand of barley. So much did 
the children of Ammon render unto 
him, in the second year also, and in the 
third. 6So Jotham became mighty, 
because he ordered his ways before the 
LORD his God. 7Now the rest of the acts 
of Jotham, and all his wars, and his 
ways, behold, they are written in the 
book of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
8He was five and twenty years old 
when he began to reign, and reigned 
sixteen years in Jerusalem. 9And 
Jotham slept with his fathers, and they 
buried him in the city of David; and 
Ahaz his son reigned in his stead. 

Ahaz was twenty years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; 
and he did not that which was right in 
the eyes of the LORD, like David his 
father; 2but he walked in the ways of 
the kings of Israel, and made also 
molten images for the Baalim. 
3Moreover he offered in the valley of 
the son of Hinnom, and burnt his 
children in the fire, according to the 
abominations of the heathen, whom 
the LORD cast out before the children 
of Israel. 4And he sacrificed and 
offered in the high places, and on the 
hills, and under every leafy tree. 
5Wherefore the LORD his God delivered 
him into the hand of the king of Aram; 
and they smote him, and carried away 
of his a great multitude of captives, 
and brought them to Damascus. And 
he was also delivered into the hand of 
the king of Israel, who smote him with 
a great slaughter. 6For Pekah the son of 
Remaliah slew in Judah a hundred and 
twenty thousand in one day, all of 
them valiant men; because they had 
forsaken the LORD, the God of their 
fathers. 7And Zichri, a mighty man of 
Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s 
son, and Azrikam the ruler of the 
house, and Elkanah that was next to 
the king. 8And the children of Israel 
carried away captive of their brethren 
two hundred thousand women, sons, 
and daughters, and took also away 
27 

28 




much spoil from them, and brought the 
spoil to Samaria. 

9But a prophet of the LORD was 
there, whose name was Oded; and he 
went out to meet the host that came to 
Samaria, and said unto them: ‘Behold, 
because the LORD, the God of your 
fathers, was wroth with Judah, He hath 
delivered them into your hand, and ye 
have slain them in a rage which hath 
reached up unto heaven. 10And now ye 
purpose to bring the children of Judah 
and Jerusalem into subjection for 
bondmen and bondwomen unto you; 
but are there not even with you acts of 
guilt of your own against the LORD 
your God? 11Now hear me therefore, 
and send back the captives, that ye 
have taken captive of your brethren; 
for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon 
you.’ 12Then certain of the heads of the 
children of Ephraim, Azariah the son 
of Jehohanan, Berechiah the son of 
Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son 
of Shallum, and Amasa the son of 
Hadlai, stood up against them that 
came from the war, 13and said unto 
them: ‘Ye shall not bring in the 
captives hither; for ye purpose that 
which will bring upon us guilt against 
the LORD, to add unto our sins and to 
our guilt; for our guilt is great, and 
there is fierce wrath against Israel.’ 
14So the armed men left the captives 
and the spoil before the princes and all 
the congregation. 15And the men that 
have been mentioned by name rose up, 
and took the captives, and with the 
spoil clothed all that were naked 
among them, and arrayed them, and 
shod them, and gave them to eat and to 
drink, and anointed them, and carried 
all the feeble of them upon asses, and 
brought them to Jericho, the city of 
palm-trees, unto their brethren; then 
they returned to Samaria. 

16At that time did king Ahaz send 
unto the kings of Assyria to help him. 
17For again the Edomites had come 
and smitten Judah, and carried away 
captives. 18The Philistines also had 
invaded the cities of the Lowland, and 
of the South of Judah, and had taken 
Beth-shemesh, and Aijalon, and 
Gederoth, and Soco with the towns 
thereof, and Timnah with the towns 
thereof, Gimzo also and the towns 
thereof; and they dwelt there. 19For the 
LORD brought Judah low because of 
Ahaz king of Israel; for he had cast 
away restraint in Judah, and acted 
treacherously against the LORD. 20And 
Tillegath-pilneser king of Assyria 
came unto him, and distressed him, but 
strengthened him not. 21For Ahaz 
stripped the house of the LORD, and the 
house of the king and the princes, and 
gave thereof unto the king of Assyria; 
but it helped him not. 

22And in the time of his distress did 
he act even more treacherously against 
the LORD, this same king Ahaz. 23For 
he sacrificed unto the gods of 
Damascus, which smote him; and he 
said: ‘Because the gods of the kings of 
Aram helped them, therefore will I 
sacrifice to them, that they may help 
me.’ But they were the ruin of him, 


and of all Israel. 24And Ahaz gathered 
together the vessels of the house of 
God, and cut in pieces the vessels of 
the house of God, and shut up the 
doors of the house of the LORD; and he 
made him altars in every corner of 
Jerusalem. 25And in every city of 
Judah he made high places to offer 
unto other gods, and provoked the 
LORD, the God of his fathers. 26Now 
the rest of his acts, and all his ways, 
first and last, behold, they are written 
in the book of the kings of Judah and 
Israel. 27And Ahaz slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
city, even in Jerusalem; for they 
brought him not into the sepulchres of 
the kings of Israel; and Hezekiah his 
son reigned in his stead. 

Hezekiah began to reign when 
he was five and twenty years 
old; and he reigned nine and twenty 
years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s 
name was Abijah the daughter of 
Zechariah. 2And he did that which was 
right in the eyes of the LORD, according 
to all that David his father had done. 
3He in the first year of his reign, in the 
first month, opened the doors of the 
house of the LORD, and repaired them. 
4And he brought in the priests and the 
Levites, and gathered them together 
into the broad place on the east; 5and 
said unto them: ‘Hear me, ye Levites: 
now sanctify yourselves, and sanctify 
the house of the LORD, the God of your 
fathers, and carry forth the filthiness 
out of the holy place. 6For our fathers 
have acted treacherously, and done 
that which was evil in the sight of the 
LORD our God, and have forsaken Him, 
and have turned away their faces from 
the habitation of the LORD, and turned 
their backs. 7Also they have shut up 
the doors of the porch, and put out the 
lamps, and have not burned incense 
nor offered burnt-offerings in the holy 
place unto the God of Israel. 
8Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was 
upon Judah and Jerusalem, and He 
hath delivered them to be a horror, an 
astonishment, and a hissing, as ye see 
with your eyes. 9For, lo, our fathers 
have fallen by the sword, and our sons 
and our daughters and our wives are in 
captivity for this. 10Now it is in my 
heart to make a covenant with the 
LORD, the God of Israel, that His fierce 
anger may turn away from us. 11My 
sons, be not now negligent; for the 
LORD hath chosen you to stand before 
Him, to minister unto Him, and that ye 
should be His ministers, and offer unto 
Him.’ 

12Then the Levites arose, Mahath 
the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of 
Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites; 
and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son 
of Abdi, and Azariah the son of 
Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah 
the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son 
of Joah; 13and of the sons of Elizaphan, 
Shimri and Jeiel; and of the sons of 
Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah; 14and 
of the sons of Heman, Jehiel and 
Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun, 
Shemaiah and Uzziel. 15And they 
gathered their brethren, and sanctified 
29 




themselves, and went in, according to 
the commandment of the king by the 
words of the LORD, to cleanse the 
house of the LORD. 16And the priests 
went in unto the inner part of the 
house of the LORD, to cleanse it, and 
brought out all the uncleanness that 
they found in the temple of the LORD 
into the court of the house of the LORD. 
And the Levites took it, to carry it out 
abroad to the brook Kidron. 17Now 
they began on the first day of the first 
month to sanctify, and on the eighth 
day of the month came they to the 
porch of the LORD; and they sanctified 
the house of the LORD in eight days; 
and on the sixteenth day of the first 
month they made an end. 18Then they 
went in to Hezekiah the king within 
[the palace], and said: ‘We have 
cleansed all the house of the LORD, 
even the altar of burnt-offering, with 
all the vessels thereof, and the table of 
showbread, with all the vessels 
thereof. 19Moreover all the vessels, 
which king Ahaz in his reign did cast 
away when he acted treacherously, 
have we prepared and sanctified; and, 
behold, they are before the altar of the 
LORD.’ 

20Then Hezekiah the king arose 
early, and gathered the princes of the 
city, and went up to the house of the 
LORD. 21And they brought seven 
bullocks, and seven rams, and seven 
lambs, and seven he-goats, for a sin-
offering for the kingdom and for the 
sanctuary and for Judah. And he 
commanded the priests the sons of 
Aaron to offer them on the altar of the 
LORD. 22So they killed the bullocks, 
and the priests received the blood, and 
dashed it against the altar; and they 
killed the rams, and dashed the blood 
against the altar; they killed also the 
lambs, and dashed the blood against 
the altar. 23And they brought near the 
he-goats for the sin-offering before the 
king and the congregation, and they 
laid their hands upon them; 24and the 
priests killed them, and they made a 
sin-offering with their blood upon the 
altar, to make atonement for all Israel; 
for the king commanded that the 
burnt-offering and the sin-offering 
should be made for all Israel. 

25And he set the Levites in the house 
of the LORD with cymbals, with 
psalteries, and with harps, according to 
the commandment of David, and of 
Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the 
prophet; for the commandment was of 
the LORD by His prophets. 26And the 
Levites stood with the instruments of 
David, and the priests with the 
trumpets. 27And Hezekiah commanded 
to offer the burnt-offering upon the 
altar. And when the burnt-offering 
began, the song of the LORD began 
also, and the trumpets, together with 
the instruments of David king of 
Israel. 28And all the congregation 
prostrated themselves, and the singers 
sang, and the trumpeters sounded; all 
this continued until the burnt-offering 
was finished. 29And when they had 
made an end of offering, the king and 
all that were present with him bowed 


themselves and prostrated themselves. 
30Moreover Hezekiah the king and the 
princes commanded the Levites to sing 
praises unto the LORD with the words 
of David, and of Asaph the seer. And 
they sang praises with gladness, and 
they bowed their heads and prostrated 
themselves. 

31Then Hezekiah answered and said: 
‘Now ye have consecrated yourselves 
unto the LORD, come near and bring 
sacrifices and thank-offerings into the 
house of the LORD.’ And the 
congregation brought in sacrifices and 
thank-offerings; and as many as were 
of a willing heart brought burnt-
offerings. 32And the number of the 
burnt-offerings, which the 
congregation brought, was threescore 
and ten bullocks, a hundred rams, and 
two hundred lambs; all these were for 
a burnt-offering to the LORD. 33And the 
consecrated things were six hundred 
oxen and three thousand sheep. 34But 
the priests were too few, so that they 
could not flay all the burnt-offerings; 
wherefore their brethren the Levites 
did help them, till the work was ended, 
and until the priests had sanctified 
themselves; for the Levites were more 
upright in heart to sanctify themselves 
than the priests. 35And also the burnt-
offerings were in abundance, with the 
fat of the peace-offerings, and the 
drink-offerings for every burnt-
offering. So the service of the house of 
the LORD was firmly established. 36And 
Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, 
because of that which God had 
prepared for the people; for the thing 
was done suddenly. 

And Hezekiah sent to all Israel 
and Judah, and wrote letters 
also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that 
they should come to the house of the 
LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the 
passover unto the LORD, the God of 
Israel. 2For the king had taken counsel, 
and his princes, and all the 
congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the 
passover in the second month. 3For 
they could not keep it at that time, 
because the priests had not sanctified 
themselves in sufficient number, 
neither had the people gathered 
themselves together to Jerusalem. 
4And the thing was right in the eyes of 
the king and of all the congregation. 
5So they established a decree to make 
proclamation throughout all Israel, 
from Beer-sheba even to Dan, that 
they should come to keep the passover 
unto the LORD, the God of Israel, at 
Jerusalem; for they had not kept it in 
great numbers according as it is 
written. 

6So the posts went with the letters 
from the king and his princes 
throughout all Israel and Judah, and 
according to the commandment of the 
king, saying: ‘Ye children of Israel, 
turn back unto the LORD, the God of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that He 
may return to the remnant that are 
escaped of you out of the hand of the 
kings of Assyria. 7And be not ye like 
your fathers, and like your brethren, 
who acted treacherously against the 
30 




LORD, the God of their fathers, so that 
He delivered them to be an 
astonishment, as ye see. 8Now be ye 
not stiffnecked, as your fathers were; 
but yield yourselves unto the LORD, 
and enter into His sanctuary, which He 
hath sanctified for ever, and serve the 
LORD your God, that His fierce anger 
may turn away from you. 9For if ye 
turn back unto the LORD, your brethren 
and your children shall find 
compassion before them that led them 
captive, and shall come back into this 
land; for the LORD your God is 
gracious and merciful, and will not 
turn away His face from you, if ye 
return unto Him.’ 

10So the posts passed from city to 
city through the country of Ephraim 
and Manasseh, even unto Zebulun; but 
they laughed them to scorn, and 
mocked them. 11Nevertheless divers of 
Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun 
humbled themselves, and came to 
Jerusalem. 12Also in Judah was the 
hand of God to give them one heart, to 
do the commandment of the king and 
of the princes by the word of the LORD. 

13And there assembled at Jerusalem 
much people to keep the feast of 
unleavened bread in the second month, 
a very great congregation. 14And they 
arose and took away the altars that 
were in Jerusalem, and all the altars 
for incense took they away, and cast 
them into the brook Kidron. 15Then 
they killed the passover lamb on the 
fourteenth day of the second month; 
and the priests and the Levites were 
ashamed, and sanctified themselves, 
and brought burnt-offerings into the 
house of the LORD. 16And they stood in 
their place after their order, according 
to the law of Moses the man of God; 
the priests dashed the blood, which 
they received of the hand of the 
Levites. 17For there were many in the 
congregation that had not sanctified 
themselves; therefore the Levites had 
the charge of killing the passover 
lambs for every one that was not clean, 
to sanctify them unto the LORD. 18For a 
multitude of the people, even many of 
Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and 
Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, 
yet did they eat the passover otherwise 
than it is written. For Hezekiah had 
prayed for them, saying: ‘The good 
LORD pardon 19every one that setteth 
his heart to seek God, the LORD, the 
God of his fathers, though [he be] not 
[cleansed] according to the 
purification that pertaineth to holy 
things.’ 20And the LORD hearkened to 
Hezekiah, and healed the people. 
21And the children of Israel that were 
present at Jerusalem kept the feast of 
unleavened bread seven days with 
great gladness; and the Levites and the 
priests praised the LORD day by day, 
singing with loud instruments unto the 
LORD. 22And Hezekiah spoke 
encouragingly unto all the Levites that 
were well skilled in the service of the 
LORD. So they did eat throughout the 
feast for the seven days, offering 
sacrifices of peace-offerings, and 


giving thanks to the LORD, the God of 
their fathers. 

23And the whole congregation took 
counsel to keep other seven days; and 
they kept other seven days with 
gladness. 24For Hezekiah king of Judah 
did give to the congregation for 
offerings a thousand bullocks and 
seven thousand sheep; and the princes 
gave to the congregation a thousand 
bullocks and ten thousand sheep; and 
priests sanctified themselves in great 
numbers. 25And all the congregation of 
Judah, with the priests and the Levites, 
and all the congregation that came out 
of Israel, and the strangers that came 
out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt 
in Judah, rejoiced. 26So there was great 
joy in Jerusalem; for since the time of 
Solomon the son of David king of 
Israel there was not the like in 
Jerusalem. 27Then the priests the 
Levites arose and blessed the people; 
and their voice was heard [of the 
LORD], and their prayer came up to His 
holy habitation, even unto heaven. 

Now when all this was 
finished, all Israel that were 
present went out to the cities of Judah, 
and broke in pieces the pillars, and 
hewed down the Asherim, and broke 
down the high places and the altars out 
of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim 
also and Manasseh, until they had 
destroyed them all. Then all the 
children of Israel returned, every man 
to his possession, into their own cities. 

2And Hezekiah appointed the 
courses of the priest and the Levites 
after their courses, every man 
according to his service, both the 
priests and the Levites, for burnt-
offerings and for peace-offerings, to 
minister, and to give thanks, and to 
praise in the gates of the camp of the 
LORD. 3He appointed also the king’s 
portion of his substance for the burnt-
offerings, to wit, for the morning and 
evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-
offerings for the sabbaths, and for the 
new moons, and for the appointed 
seasons, as it is written in the Law of 
the LORD. 4Moreover he commanded 
the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to 
give the portion of the priests and the 
Levites, that they might give 
themselves to the law of the LORD. 
5And as soon as the commandment 
came abroad, the children of Israel 
gave in abundance the first-fruits of 
corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of 
all the increase of the field; and the 
tithe of all things brought they in 
abundantly. 6And the children of Israel 
and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of 
Judah, they also brought in the tithe of 
oxen and sheep, and the tithe of 
hallowed things which were hallowed 
unto the LORD their God, and laid them 
by heaps. 7In the third month they 
began to lay the foundation of the 
heaps, and finished them in the 
seventh month. 8And when Hezekiah 
and the princes came and saw the 
heaps, they blessed the LORD, and His 
people Israel. 9Then Hezekiah 
questioned the priests and the Levites 
concerning the heaps. 10And Azariah 
31 




the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, 
answered him and said: ‘Since the 
people began to bring the offerings 
into the house of the LORD, we have 
eaten and had enough, and have left 
plenty; for the LORD hath blessed His 
people; and that which is left is this 
great store.’ 

11Then Hezekiah commanded to 
prepare chambers in the house of the 
LORD; and they prepared them. 12And 
they brought in the offerings and the 
tithes and the hallowed things 
faithfully; and over them Conaniah the 
Levite was ruler, and Shimei his 
brother was second. 13And Jehiel, and 
Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and 
Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and 
Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, 
were overseers under the hand of 
Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by 
the appointment of Hezekiah the king, 
and Azariah the ruler of the house of 
God. 14And Kore the son of Imnah the 
Levite, the porter at the east gate, was 
over the freewill-offerings of God, to 
distribute the offerings of the LORD, 
and the most holy things. 15And under 
him were Eden, and Miniamin, and 
Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and 
Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, 
in their office of trust, to give to their 
brethren by courses, as well to the 
great as to the small; 16beside them 
that were reckoned by genealogy of 
males, from three years old and 
upward, even every one that entered 
into the house of the LORD, for his 
daily portion, for their service in their 
charges according to their courses; 
17and them that were reckoned by 
genealogy of the priests by their 
fathers’houses, and the Levites from 
twenty years old and upward, in their 
charges by their courses; 18even to give 
to them that were reckoned by 
genealogy of all their little ones, their 
wives, and their sons, and their 
daughters, through all the 
congregation; for in their office of 
trust they administered the sacred 
gifts; 19also for the sons of Aaron the 
priests, that were in the fields of the 
open land about their cities, in every 
city, there were men that were 
mentioned by name, to give portions to 
all the males among the priests, and to 
all that were reckoned by genealogy 
among the Levites. 

20And thus did Hezekiah throughout 
all Judah; and he wrought that which 
was good and right and faithful before 
the LORD his God. 21And in every work 
that he began in the service of the 
house of God, and in the law, and in 
the commandments, to seek his God, 
he did it with all his heart, and 
prospered. 

After these things, and this 
faithfulness, Sennacherib king 
of Assyria came, and entered into 
Judah, and encamped against the 
fortified cities, and thought to make a 
breach therein for himself. 2And when 
Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was 
come, and that he was purposed to 
fight against Jerusalem, 3he took 
counsel with his princes and his 
32 




mighty men to stop the waters of the 
fountains which were without the city; 
and they helped him. 4So there was 
gathered much people together, and 
they stopped all the fountains, and the 
brook that flowed through the midst of 
the land, saying: ‘Why should the 
kings of Assyria come, and find much 
water?’ 5And he took courage, and 
built up all the wall that was broken 
down, and raised it up to the towers, 
and another wall without, and 
strengthened Millo in the city of 
David, and made weapons and shields 
in abundance. 6And he set captains of 
war over the people, and gathered 
them together to him in the broad 
place at the gate of the city, and spoke 
encouragingly to them, saying: 7’Be 
strong and of good courage, be not 
afraid nor dismayed for the king of 
Assyria, nor for all the multitude that 
is with him; for there is a Greater with 
us than with him: 8with him is an arm 
of flesh; but with us is the LORD our 
God to help us, and to fight our 
battles.’ And the people rested 
themselves upon the words of 
Hezekiah king of Judah. 

9After this did Sennacherib king of 
Assyria send his servants to 
Jerusalem—now he was before 
Lachish, and all his power with him—
unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto 
all Judah that were at Jerusalem, 
saying: 10’Thus saith Sennacherib king 
of Assyria: Whereon do ye trust, that 
ye abide the siege in Jerusalem? 
11Doth not Hezekiah persuade you, to 
give you over to die by famine and by 
thirst, saying: The LORD our God will 
deliver us out of the hand of the king 
of Assyria? 12Hath not the same 
Hezekiah taken away His high places 
and His altars, and commanded Judah 
and Jerusalem, saying: Ye shall 
worship before one altar, and upon it 
shall ye offer? 13Know ye not what I 
and my fathers have done unto all the 
peoples of the lands? Were the gods of 
the nations of the lands in any wise 
able to deliver their land out of my 
hand? 14Who was there among all the 
gods of those nations which my fathers 
utterly destroyed, that could deliver his 
people out of my hand, that your God 
should be able to deliver you out of 
my hand? 15Now therefore let not 
Hezekiah beguile you, nor persuade 
you after this manner, neither believe 
ye him; for no god of any nation or 
kingdom was able to deliver his people 
out of my hand, and out of the hand of 
my fathers; how much less shall your 
God deliver you out of my hand?’ 

16And his servants spoke yet more 
against the LORD God, and against His 
servant Hezekiah. 17He wrote also a 
letter, to taunt the LORD, the God of 
Israel, and to speak against Him, 
saying: ‘As the gods of the nations of 
the lands, which have not delivered 
their people out of my hand, so shall 
not the God of Hezekiah deliver His 
people out of my hand.’ 18And they 
cried with a loud voice in the 
Jews’language unto the people of 
Jerusalem that were on the wall, to 


terrify them, and to affright them; that 
they might take the city. 19And they 
spoke of the God of Jerusalem, as of 
the gods of the peoples of the earth, 
which are the work of men’s hands. 

20And Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah 
the prophet the son of Amoz, prayed 
because of this, and cried to heaven. 
21And the LORD sent an angel, who cut 
off all the mighty men of valour, and 
the leaders and captains, in the camp 
of the king of Assyria. So he returned 
with shame of face to his own land. 
And when he was come into the house 
of his god, they that came forth of his 
own bowels slew him there with the 
sword. 22Thus the LORD saved 
Hezekiah and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem from the hand of 
Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and 
from the hand of all, and guided them 
on every side. 23And many brought 
gifts unto the LORD to Jerusalem, and 
precious things to Hezekiah king of 
Judah; so that he was exalted in the 
sight of all nations from thenceforth. 

24In those days Hezekiah was sick 
even unto death; and he prayed unto 
the LORD; and He spoke unto him, and 
gave him a sign. 25But Hezekiah 
rendered not according to the benefit 
done unto him; for his heart was lifted 
up; therefore there was wrath upon 
him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. 
26Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled 
himself for the pride of his heart, both 
he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so 
that the wrath of the LORD came not 
upon them in the days of Hezekiah. 

27And Hezekiah had exceeding 
much riches and honour; and he 
provided him treasuries for silver, and 
for gold, and for precious stones, and 
for spices, and for shields, and for all 
manner of goodly vessels; 28store-
houses also for the increase of corn, 
and wine, and oil; and stalls for all 
manner of beasts, and flocks in folds. 
29Moreover he provided him cities, and 
possessions of flocks and herds in 
abundance; for God had given him 
very much substance. 30This same 
Hezekiah also stopped the upper 
spring of the waters of Gihon, and 
brought them straight down on the 
west side of the city of David. And 
Hezekiah prospered in all his works. 
31Howbeit in the business of the 
ambassadors of the princes of 
Babylon, who sent unto him to inquire 
of the wonder that was done in the 
land, God left him, to try him, that He 
might know all that was in his heart. 

32Now the rest of the acts of 
Hezekiah, and his good deeds, behold, 
they are written in the vision of Isaiah 
the prophet the son of Amoz, and in 
the book of the kings of Judah and 
Israel. 33And Hezekiah slept with his 
fathers, and they buried him in the 
ascent of the sepulchres of the sons of 
David; and all Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem did him 
honour at his death. And Manasseh his 
son reigned in his stead. 

Manasseh was twelve years 
old when he began to reign; 
and he reigned fifty and five years in 
33 




Jerusalem. 2And he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD, after the 
abominations of the nations, whom the 
LORD cast out before the children of 
Israel. 3For he built again the high 
places which Hezekiah his father had 
broken down; and he reared up altars 
for the Baalim, and made Asheroth, 
and worshipped all the host of heaven, 
and served them. 4And he built altars 
in the house of the LORD, whereof the 
LORD said: ‘In Jerusalem shall My 
name be for ever.’ 5And he built altars 
for all the host of heaven in the two 
courts of the house of the LORD. 6He 
also made his children to pass through 
the fire in the valley of the son of 
Hinnom; and he practised soothsaying, 
and used enchantments, and practised 
sorcery, and appointed them that 
divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit; 
he wrought much evil in the sight of 
the LORD, to provoke Him. 7And he set 
the graven image of the idol, which he 
had made, in the house of God, of 
which God said to David and to 
Solomon his son: ‘In this house, and in 
Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of 
all the tribes of Israel, will I put My 
name for ever; 8neither will I any more 
remove the foot of Israel from off the 
land which I have appointed for your 
fathers; if only they will observe to do 
all that I have commanded them, even 
all the law and the statutes and the 
ordinances by the hand of Moses.’ 
9And Manasseh made Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, so that 
they did evil more than did the nations, 
whom the LORD destroyed before the 
children of Israel. 

10And the LORD spoke to Manasseh, 
and to his people; but they gave no 
heed. 11Wherefore the LORD brought 
upon them the captains of the host of 
the king of Assyria, who took 
Manasseh with hooks, and bound him 
with fetters, and carried him to 
Babylon. 12And when he was in 
distress, he besought the LORD his God, 
and humbled himself greatly before 
the God of his fathers. 13And he prayed 
unto Him; and He was entreated of 
him, and heard his supplication, and 
brought him back to Jerusalem into his 
kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that 
the LORD He was God. 

14Now after this he built an outer 
wall to the city of David, on the west 
side of Gihon, in the valley, even to 
the entrance at the fish gate; and he 
compassed about Ophel, and raised it 
up a very great height; and he put 
captains of the army in all the fortified 
cities of Judah. 15And he took away the 
strange gods, and the idol out of the 
house of the LORD, and all the altars 
that he had built in the mount of the 
house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, 
and cast them out of the city. 16And he 
built up the altar of the LORD, and 
offered thereon sacrifices of peace-
offerings and of thanksgiving, and 
commanded Judah to serve the LORD, 
the God of Israel. 17Nevertheless the 
people did sacrifice still in the high 
places, but only unto the LORD their 
God. 


18Now the rest of the acts of 
Manasseh, and his prayer unto his 
God, and the words of the seers that 
spoke to him in the name of the LORD, 
the God of Israel, behold, they are 
written among the acts of the kings of 
Israel. 19His prayer also, and how 
[God] was entreated of him, and all his 
sin and his transgression, and the 
places wherein he built high places, 
and set up the Asherim and the graven 
images, before he humbled himself; 
behold, they are written in the history 
of the seers. 20So Manasseh slept with 
his fathers, and they buried him in his 
own house; and Amon his son reigned 
in his stead. 

21Amon was twenty and two years 
old when he began to reign; and he 
reigned two years in Jerusalem. 22And 
he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the LORD, as did Manasseh his 
father; and Amon sacrificed unto all 
the graven images which Manasseh his 
father had made, and served them. 
23And he humbled not himself before 
the LORD, as Manasseh his father had 
humbled himself; but this same Amon 
became guilty more and more. 24And 
his servants conspired against him, and 
put him to death in his own house. 
25But the people of the land slew all 
them that had conspired against king 
Amon; and the people of the land 
made Josiah his son king in his stead. 

Josiah was eight years old 
when he began to reign; and 
he reigned thirty and one years in 
Jerusalem. 2And he did that which was 
right in the eyes of the LORD, and 
walked in the ways of David his 
father, and turned not aside to the right 
hand or to the left. 3For in the eighth 
year of his reign, while he was yet 
young, he began to seek after the God 
of David his father; and in the twelfth 
year he began to purge Judah and 
Jerusalem from the high places, and 
the Asherim, and the graven images, 
and the molten images. 4And they 
broke down the altars of the Baalim in 
his presence; and the sun-images, that 
were on high above them, he hewed 
down; and the Asherim, and the 
graven images, and the molten images, 
he broke in pieces, and made dust of 
them, and strewed it upon the graves 
of them that had sacrificed unto them. 
5And he burnt the bones of the priests 
upon their altars, and purged Judah 
and Jerusalem. 6And so did he in the 
cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and 
Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their 
axes round about. 7And he broke down 
the altars, and beat the Asherim and 
the graven images into powder, and 
hewed down all the sun-images 
throughout all the land of Israel, and 
returned to Jerusalem. 

8Now in the eighteenth year of his 
reign, when he had purged the land, 
and the house, he sent Shaphan the son 
of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor 
of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz 
the recorder, to repair the house of the 
LORD his God. 9And they came to 
Hilkiah the high priest, and delivered 
the money that was brought into the 
34 




house of God, which the Levites, the 
keepers of the door, had gathered of 
the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, 
and of all the remnant of Israel, and of 
all Judah and Benjamin, and they 
returned to Jerusalem. 10And they 
delivered it into the hand of the 
workmen that had the oversight of the 
house of the LORD; and the workmen 
that wrought in the house of the LORD 
gave it to mend and repair the house; 
11even to the carpenters and to the 
builders gave they it, to buy hewn 
stone, and timber for couplings, and to 
make beams for the houses which the 
kings of Judah had destroyed. 12And 
the men did the work faithfully; and 
the overseers of them were Jahath and 
Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of 
Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, 
of the sons of the Kohathites, to 
preside over it; and other of the 
Levites, all that had skill with 
instruments of music. 13Also they were 
over the bearers of burdens, and 
presided over all that did the work in 
every manner of service; and of the 
Levites there were scribes, and 
officers, and porters. 

14And when they brought out the 
money that was brought into the house 
of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found 
the book of the Law of the LORD given 
by Moses. 15and Hilkiah answered and 
said to Shaphan the scribe: ‘I have 
found the book of the Law in the 
house of the LORD.’ And Hilkiah 
delivered the book to Shaphan. 16And 
Shaphan carried the book to the king, 
and moreover brought back word unto 
the king, saying: ‘All that was 
committed to thy servants, they do it. 
17And they have poured out the money 
that was found in the house of the 
LORD, and have delivered it into the 
hand of the overseers, and into the 
hand of the workmen.’ 18And Shaphan 
the scribe told the king, saying: 
‘Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a 
book.’ And Shaphan read therein 
before the king. 19And it came to pass, 
when the king had heard the words of 
the Law, that he rent his clothes. 20And 
the king commanded Hilkiah, and 
Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and 
Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan 
the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s 
servant, saying: 21’Go ye, inquire of 
the LORD for me, and for them that are 
left in Israel and in Judah, concerning 
the words of the book that is found; for 
great is the wrath of the LORD that is 
poured out upon us, because our 
fathers have not kept the word of the 
LORD, to do according unto all that is 
written in this book.’ 

22So Hilkiah, and they whom the 
king [had commanded], went to 
Huldah the prophetess, the wife of 
Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of 
Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe—now 
she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second 
quarter—and they spoke to her to that 
effect. 23And she said unto them: 
‘Thus saith the LORD, the God of 
Israel: Tell ye the man that sent you 
unto me: 24Thus saith the LORD: 
Behold, I will bring evil upon this 


place, and upon the inhabitants 
thereof, even all the curses that are 
written in the book which they have 
read before the king of Judah; 
25because they have forsaken Me, and 
have offered unto other gods, that they 
might provoke Me with all the works 
of their hands; therefore is My wrath 
poured out upon this place, and it shall 
not be quenched. 26But unto the king 
of Judah, who sent you to inquire of 
the LORD, thus shall ye say to him: 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 
As touching the words which thou hast 
heard, 27because thy heart was tender, 
and thou didst humble thyself before 
God, when thou heardest His words 
against this place, and against the 
inhabitants thereof, and hast humbled 
thyself before Me, and hast rent thy 
clothes, and wept before Me; I also 
have heard thee, saith the LORD. 
28Behold, I will gather thee to thy 
fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to 
thy grave in peace, neither shall thine 
eyes see all the evil that I will bring 
upon this place, and upon the 
inhabitants thereof.’ And they brought 
back word unto the king. 

29Then the king sent and gathered 
together all the elders of Judah and 
Jerusalem. 30And the king went up to 
the house of the LORD, and all the men 
of Judah and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and the priests, and the 
Levites, and all the people, both great 
and small; and he read in their ears all 
the words of the book of the covenant 
that was found in the house of the 
LORD. 31And the king stood in his 
place, and made a covenant before the 
LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to 
keep His commandments, and His 
testimonies, and His statutes, with all 
his heart, and with all his soul, to 
perform the words of the covenant that 
were written in this book. 32And he 
caused all that were found in 
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. 
And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did 
according to the covenant of God, the 
God of their fathers. 33And Josiah took 
away all the abominations out of all 
the countries that pertained to the 
children of Israel, and made all that 
were found in Israel to serve, even to 
serve the LORD their God. All his days 
they departed not from following the 
LORD, the God of their fathers. 

And Josiah kept a passover 
unto the LORD in Jerusalem; 
and they killed the passover lamb on 
the fourteenth day of the first month. 
2And he set the priests in their charges, 
and encouraged them to the service of 
the house of the LORD. 3And he said 
unto the Levites that taught all Israel, 
that were holy unto the LORD: ‘Put the 
holy ark in the house which Solomon 
the son of David king of Israel did 
build; there shall no more be a burden 
upon your shoulders; now serve the 
LORD your God, and His people Israel. 
4And prepare ye after your 
fathers’houses by your courses, 
according to the writing of David king 
of Israel, and according to the writing 
of Solomon his son. 5And stand in the 
35 




holy place according to the divisions 
of the fathers’houses of your brethren 
the children of the people, and [let 
there be for each] a portion of a 
father’s house of the Levites. 6And kill 
the passover lamb, and sanctify 
yourselves, and prepare for your 
brethren, to do according to the word 
of the LORD by the hand of Moses.’ 

7And Josiah gave to the children of 
the people, of the flock, lambs and 
kids, all of them for the passover-
offerings, unto all that were present, to 
the number of thirty thousand, and 
three thousand bullocks; these were of 
the king’s substance. 8And his princes 
gave willingly unto the people, to the 
priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah and 
Zechariah and Jehiel, the rulers of the 
house of God, gave unto the priests for 
the passover-offerings two thousand 
and six hundred [small cattle], and 
three hundred oxen. 9Conaniah also, 
and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his 
brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and 
Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, 
gave unto the Levites for the passover-
offerings five thousand [small cattle], 
and five hundred oxen. 

10So the service was prepared, and 
the priests stood in their place, and the 
Levites by their courses, according to 
the king’s commandment. 11And they 
killed the passover lamb, and the 
priests dashed [the blood, which they 
received] of their hand, and the Levites 
flayed them. 12And they removed the 
portions that were to be burnt, that 
they might give them to the divisions 
of the fathers’houses of the children of 
the people, to present unto the LORD, as 
it is written in the book of Moses. And 
so did they with the oxen. 13And they 
roasted the passover with fire 
according to the ordinance; and the 
holy offerings sod they in pots, and in 
caldrons, and in pans, and carried them 
quickly to all the children of the 
people. 14And afterward they prepared 
for themselves, and for the priests; 
because the priests the sons of Aaron 
were busied in offering the portions 
that were to be burnt and the fat until 
night; therefore the Levites prepared 
for themselves, and for the priests the 
sons of Aaron. 15And the singers the 
sons of Asaph were in their place, 
according to the commandment of 
David, and Asaph, and Heman, and 
Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the 
porters were at every gate; they needed 
not to depart from their service, for 
their brethren the Levites prepared for 
them. 

16So all the service of the LORD was 
prepared the same day, to keep the 
passover, and to offer burnt-offerings 
upon the altar of the LORD, according 
to the commandment of king Josiah. 
17And the children of Israel that were 
present kept the passover at that time, 
and the feast of unleavened bread 
seven days. 18And there was no 
passover like to that kept in Israel from 
the days of Samuel the prophet; 
neither did any of the kings of Israel 
keep such a passover as Josiah kept, 
and the priests, and the Levites, and all 


Judah and Israel that were present, and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 19In the 
eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah 
was this passover kept. 

20After all this, when Josiah had 
prepared the temple, Neco king of 
Egypt went up to fight against 
Carchemish by the Euphrates; and 
Josiah went out against him. 21But he 
sent ambassadors to him, saying: 
‘What have I to do with thee, thou 
king of Judah? I come not against thee 
this day, but against the house 
wherewith I have war; and God hath 
given command to speed me; forbear 
thee from meddling with God, who is 
with me, that He destroy thee not.’ 
22Nevertheless Josiah would not turn 
his face from him, but disguised 
himself, that he might fight with him, 
and hearkened not unto the words of 
Neco, from the mouth of God, and 
came to fight in the valley of Megiddo. 
23And the archers shot at king Josiah; 
and the king said to his servants: 
‘Have me away; for I am sore 
wounded.’ 24So his servants took him 
out of the chariot, and put him in the 
second chariot that he had, and 
brought him to Jerusalem; and he died, 
and was buried in the sepulchres of his 
fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem 
mourned for Josiah. 25And Jeremiah 
lamented for Josiah; and all the 
singing men and singing women spoke 
of Josiah in their lamentations, unto 
this day; and they made them an 
ordinance in Israel; and, behold, they 
are written in the lamentations. 26Now 
the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his 
good deeds, according to that which is 
written in the Law of the LORD, 27and 
his acts, first and last, behold, they are 
written in the book of the kings of 
Israel and Judah. 

Then the people of the land 
took Jehoahaz the son of 
Josiah, and made him king in his 
father’s stead in Jerusalem. 2Joahaz 
was twenty and three years old when 
he began to reign; and he reigned three 
months in Jerusalem. 3And the king of 
Egypt deposed him at Jerusalem, and 
fined the land a hundred talents of 
silver and a talent of gold. 4And the 
king of Egypt made Eliakim his 
brother king over Judah and 
Jerusalem, and changed his name to 
Jehoiakim. And Neco took Joahaz his 
brother, and carried him to Egypt. 

5Jehoiakim was twenty and five 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; 
and he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD his God. 6Against 
him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to 
carry him to Babylon. 
7Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the 
vessels of the house of the LORD to 
Babylon, and put them in his temple at 
Babylon. 8Now the rest of the acts of 
Jehoiakim, and his abominations 
which he did, and that which was 
found in him, behold, they are written 
in the book of the kings of Israel and 
Judah; and Jehoiachin his son reigned 
in his stead. 
36 




9Jehoiachin was eight years old 
when he began to reign; and he 
reigned three months and ten days in 
Jerusalem; and he did that which was 
evil in the sight of the LORD. 10And at 
the return of the year king 
Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him 
to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of 
the house of the LORD, and made 
Zedekiah his brother king over Judah 
and Jerusalem. 

11Zedekiah was twenty and one 
years old when he began to reign; and 
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; 
12and he did that which was evil in the 
sight of the LORD his God; he humbled 
not himself before Jeremiah the 
prophet speaking from the mouth of 
the LORD. 13And he also rebelled 
against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had 
made him swear by God; but he 
stiffened his neck, and hardened his 
heart from turning unto the LORD, the 
God of Israel. 14Moreover all the 
chiefs of the priests, and the people, 
transgressed very greatly after all the 
abominations of the nations; and they 
polluted the house of the LORD which 
He had hallowed in Jerusalem. 15And 
the LORD, the God of their fathers, sent 
to them by His messengers, sending 
betimes and often; because He had 
compassion on His people, and on His 
dwelling-place; 16but they mocked the 
messengers of God, and despised His 
words, and scoffed at His prophets, 
until the wrath of the LORD arose 
against His people, till there was no 
remedy. 

17Therefore He brought upon them 
the king of the Chaldeans, who slew 
their young men with the sword in the 
house of their sanctuary, and had no 
compassion upon young man or 
maiden, old man or hoary-headed; He 
gave them all into his hand. 18And all 
the vessels of the house of God, great 
and small, and the treasures of the 
house of the LORD, and the treasures of 
the king, and of his princes; all these 
he brought to Babylon. 19And they 
burnt the house of God, and broke 
down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt 
all the palaces thereof with fire, and 
destroyed all the goodly vessels 
thereof. 20And them that had escaped 
from the sword carried he away to 
Babylon; and they were servants to 
him and his sons until the reign of the 
kingdom of Persia; 21to fulfil the word 
of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, 
until the land had been paid her 
sabbaths; for as long as she lay 
desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil 
threescore and ten years. 

22Now in the first year of Cyrus king 
of Persia, that the word of the LORD by 
the mouth of Jeremiah might be 
accomplished, the LORD stirred up the 
spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he 
made a proclamation throughout all his 
kingdom, and put it also in writing, 
saying: 23’Thus saith Cyrus king of 
Persia: All the kingdoms of the earth 
hath the LORD, the God of heaven, 
given me; and He hath charged me to 
build Him a house in Jerusalem, which 
is in Judah. Whosoever there is among 


you of all His people—the LORD his 
God be with him—let him go up.’ 

 

 


