Mikvaot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today's mishnah is about things that block the water of the mikveh from having full contact with the body such that proper immersion occurs. The Hebrew term for this is "hatzitzah." 

Mishnah Five
If a menstruant placed coins in her mouth and went down and immersed herself, she becomes clean from her [former] uncleanness, but she becomes unclean on account of her spittle.   
If she put her hair in her mouth or closed her hand or pressed her lips tightly, it is as though she had not immersed herself.   
If a person held on to another man or to vessels and immersed them, they remain unclean; but if he had washed his hand before in the water, they become clean.   
Rabbi Shimon says: he should hold them loosely that water may enter into them. 
The hidden or wrinkled parts of the body do not need that water should enter into them.

Explanation
Section one: The coins that are found in a menstruant's mouth do not block her from becoming clean from her impurity, because one does not need to immerse the inside of one's mouth. However, she is made unclean immediately by the spittle that is found on the coins. This spittle is considered to have separated from her and landed on the coins and from there it re-defiles the woman.
Section two: While she need not cleanse the inside of her mouth, she does need to cleanse her hair, the palms of her hands and the outside parts of her lips. If she prevents the water from getting to these spots, then she remains impure. 
Section three: By holding on tightly to the other person or to vessels, he blocks the water from reaching the spots where he is holding them. Therefore, the person he is holding or the vessels remain unclean. 
However, if he washed his hands in the mikveh before he immerses, then the water that is on his hands joins the water that is in the mikveh and there is no blockage. 
Rabbi Shimon says that this is not sufficient. He should let his hands hold them loosely so that water comes between his hands and the vessels or the other person.
Section four: The hidden parts include, for instance, the inside of one's mouth or the inside one's ears. The wrinkled parts might include a wrinkle of fat, or something of that nature. These parts do not need to come into contact with water.  

