Mikvaot, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
If he emitted thick drops from his member, he is unclean, the words of Rabbi Elazar Hisma. 
If one had sexual dreams in the night and arose and found his flesh heated, he is unclean.   
If a woman discharged semen on the third day, she is clean, the words of Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah. 
Rabbi Ishmael says: sometimes there are four time periods, and sometimes five, and sometimes six. 
Rabbi Akiva says: there are always five. 

Explanation
Section one: Thick drops are characteristic of semen (I refuse to disclose my sources on this one). Therefore, if he emits thick drops, even at the beginning of the stream (see yesterday's mishnah), he is unclean. 
Section two: His flesh is a euphemism for his penis (see Leviticus 15:2, every language seems to have an abundance of these words). If he has sexual dreams at night and he wakes up and finds his flesh warm, he can assume that he had an emission, even if he doesn't find any other signs.
Section three: Semen defiles not only the man, but also a woman with whom he has had sexual intercourse (see Leviticus 15:18). The question asked here is how long the semen that is inside her counts as semen such that it defiles her. 
According to Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, by the third day the semen inside her has deteriorated enough such that it doesn't count as semen. If she has some discharge, she is not impure.
A time period is either a day or a night. Rabbi Ishmael holds that a woman who has discharge on the third day is impure, but one who has discharge on the fourth day is pure. Therefore, sometimes there can be four time periods in which she is impure. For instance if she has relations on late Sunday afternoon, the discharge is impure through Wednesday morning, which is four full time periods (Sunday night, Monday day, Monday night, Tuesday day). But if she has relations at the beginning of Sunday morning, then Sunday day counts as another time period, and there are five. And if she has relations on Saturday night at the beginning of the night, then Saturday night counts as one of the time periods, and there will be six time periods.
Rabbi Akiva says that the time is set by the number of periods between the time she had relations and the time that she discharges the semen. If she discharges within five time periods, she is impure. 
