Niddah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a male or female who never show signs of hitting puberty. A female in this category is called an aylonit, which probably comes from the word "ayil"—ram. And a male is called a "saris" which is the Hebrew word for eunuch. The laws of this mishnah can also partly be found in Yevamot 8:5.  

Mishnah Nine
If a woman at the age of twenty did not bring forth two hairs, she must bring evidence that she is twenty years of age and she is an aylonit, she doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum. 
If a man at the age of twenty years did not produce two hairs, he  must bring evidence that he is twenty years old and he becomes confirmed   as a saris  and he doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum, the words of Bet Hillel. 
Bet Shammai says: with both of them at the age of eighteen. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: In the case of the male, according to the words of Bet Hillel, while in that of the female, in accordance with the words of Bet Shammai, since a woman matures earlier than a man. 

Explanation
Section one: If a woman turns twenty and has not yet hit puberty, meaning she has no pubic hair, and can prove that she is twenty, then she is an aylonit, a woman who is unable to procreate. If she is married and her husband dies without offspring she is not subject to the laws of levirate marriage—halitzah or yibbum. This is because she is unable to procreate.
Section two: The same rules apply to a man who reaches age twenty. If his brother dies without children, he doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum with the widow. If there are no other brothers, then the widow does not require halitzah or yibbum at all. It is as if her husband died without a brother. 
Section three: Bet Shammai disagrees with regard to the age at which we assume that the female is an aylonit and the male a saris. They hold that this assumption kicks in at 18, not 20 as held Bet Hillel.
Section four: Rabbi Eliezer offers a compromise position. Since girls reach maturity earlier than do boys, the age for them is 18, as said Bet Shammai. For boys, Rabbi Eliezer agrees with Bet Hillel. 

