Niddah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah continues to deal with the topic of distinguishing between virginal blood and menstrual blood—the former is pure and the latter is impure. 
The specific issue in this mishnah is whether or not one can be sure that the blood that is seen on the wedding night is virginal blood or menstrual blood. 

Mishnah One
If a young girl, whose age of menstruation has not arrived, married:
Bet Shammai says: she is allowed four nights;
And Bet Hillel says: until the wound is healed.   
If the age of her menstruation has arrived and she married:
Bet Shammai says: she is allowed the first night;
And Bet Hillel says: four nights, until after Shabbat.   
If she had observed blood while she was still in her father's house:
Bet Shammai ruled: she is only allowed the obligatory marital intercourse,   
And Bet Hillel says: all that night. 

Explanation
Section one: This section describes a girl who gets married before she is old enough to menstruate, meaning before puberty. While such marriages may have been discouraged and may have been rare, they could and probably did occur. 
According to Bet Shammai, for the first four nights after the wedding, one can assume that any blood is still virginal. The assumption is that virginal blood could last for four days, and therefore all of this blood is pure. If she continues to bleed after four days, we must assume that she has begun to menstruate.
According to Bet Hillel until the wound that was caused by her first sexual intercourse heals, all blood is pure. In other words, Bet Hillel thinks that virginity blood can last even longer than four days. 
Section two: This girl has hit puberty but has not yet begun to menstruate. It is more likely, but not at all certain, that any blood she sees could be menstrual blood. Therefore, Bet Shammai says that only for one night do we say that the blood is virginal. If there is blood the second night, we must assume that it is menstrual.
Bet Hillel says that we give her four nights. Since a virgin is married on Wednesday (see Ketubot 1:1) that means that through Saturday night the blood is considered virginal. After that, if she bleeds she will not be able to have relations.   
Section three: If the girl has already begun to menstruate, then the possibility that the blood that is issued on her wedding night is menstrual is even greater. This is the rule that would govern any woman, assuming she marries after she begins to menstruate.
Bet Shammai says that she is allowed to have intercourse one time, and that's it. Basically, the first blood is considered menstrual so intercourse a second time becomes prohibited.
Bet Hillel says that the husband and wife can have intercourse as many times as they want that night. The following night intercourse is prohibited lest she be a menstruant.  

