Niddah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Mishnah Seven
Throughout all the eleven days a woman is in a presumption of cleanness.   
If she did not examine herself—if this was unwittingly, under duress or intentionally, she is clean. 
If the time of her regular period arrived and she did not examine herself she is unclean.  
Rabbi Meir says: if a woman was in a hiding place when the time of her regular period arrived and she didn't examine herself she is clean, because fear suspends the flow of blood. 
But during the days prescribed for a zav or a zavah  or for one who waits day against day, these are  presumed to be unclean.  

Explanation
Section one: Between one period and the next there are eleven days during which a woman can presume that she will not menstruate (according to the rabbis—don't take this as gynecological advice). During this period there is a legal presumption that she is clean. If she doesn't examine herself for any reason, even intentionally, she is still clean.
Section two: When her period is supposed to arrive, she loses her presumption of cleanness. She must examine herself, and if she does not, she is considered impure.
Section three: Rabbi Meir holds that fear will suspend the onset of a woman's period. Therefore, if a woman is in hiding, perhaps due to war, and the time of her period arrives, she remains pure because we can assume that she did not have her period.
Section four: A woman who has three consecutive days of blood discharge not during the time of her period is a zavah. A man who has non-seminal genital discharge for three straight days is a zav. Both of them must check themselves every day. Every day that they do not, they are under the presumption of being impure.
"One who waits day against day" refers to a man or woman who had a genital discharge that is not menstrual or semen for one or two days (on the third day they would become a zav/zavah). They too must check themselves every day to see if more discharge had occurred. If they do not check themselves, they are presumed unclean. 
To sum up the entire mishnah—if there is some sign that would make us assume that she/he would menstruate or have impure discharge, then there is no presumption of cleanness. Without checking, she/he is impure. 

