Niddah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
If a woman miscarried an object that was like a rind, like a hair, like earth, like red flies, let her put it in water: 
If it dissolves she is unclean, 
But if it does not she is clean.  
If she miscarried an object in the shape of fishes, locusts, or any forbidden things or creeping things:
If there was blood with them she is unclean,  
If not, she is clean.   
If she miscarried an object in the shape of a beast, a wild animal or a bird, whether clean or unclean:
If it was a male she sits in uncleanness as she would for a male;
And if it was a female she sits in uncleanness as she would for a female.
But if the sex is unknown she sits in uncleanness for both male and female, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
The sages say: anything that has not the shape of a human being cannot be regarded as a human child. 

Explanation
Section one: None of these objects count as a miscarried birth, therefore she is not impure as if she had given birth. The only issue is whether or not it is considered to be blood. The test is to put that which she miscarried in water and see if it dissolves. If it does, then it counts as blood and she must consider herself to be impure. 
Section two: These shapes also don't count as births (see Bekhorot 8:1, Keritot 1:5). Therefore, the only question is again whether she is a menstruant. If there is blood, then she is. If not, she is clean.
Section three: According to Rabbi Meir, these animal shapes do count as human births. If the object seems to have been male, then she must be unclean as she would be had she given birth to a male. This means that she is unclean for seven days and then the following 33 days any blood she discharges is pure (see Leviticus 12: 2, 4).
If female, she is impure for 14 days and then the following 66 days any blood is pure (v. 5). 
If it is unclear whether it is a boy or girl, then the rule is stringent. She is impure for two weeks, as if she had given birth to a girl, but subsequent blood is pure for only 33 days, as if she had given birth to a boy.
Section four: The other rabbis disagree with Rabbi Meir. If the miscarriage doesn't have the shape of a human being, it doesn't count as a human being and she does not count as having given birth. 
 

