Niddah, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
The first three mishnayot of chapter four deal with the menstrual impurity of women from three groups that were considered outside of the Jewish fold, as determined by the rabbis: Samaritans, Sadducees and Gentiles.

Mishnah One
The daughters of the Samaritans  are regarded as menstruants from their cradle.
And Samaritans impart uncleanness to a couch underneath as to a cover above, since they have intercourse with menstruants, because [their wives] sit [unclean for seven days] on account of any blood.   
However, on account of their [uncleanness] no obligation is incurred for entrance into the Temple nor is terumah burned on their account, since their uncleanness is only of a doubtful nature.

Explanation
Section one: The Samaritans separated from the other Jewish communities (those whose center of worship was Jerusalem, the Samaritan center of worship was in Shechem) at a pretty early period in history, probably sometime during the first Temple period. As we shall see in section two, they did observe the laws of menstruation, but not according to rabbinic interpretation. One thing they did not believe was that young girls could become menstruants (we shall see in chapter five that the rabbis believed that they could). Therefore, all Samaritan girls had to be considered menstruants from the time they were born. 
Section two: The problem with Samaritan practice is not that they ignore the laws of niddah. They just observe them in the wrong way. Samaritan women treat all blood as if it were menstrual blood and they sit seven unclean days for any blood flow. If the blood that flowed on the first day was not actually menstrual and then the woman bled blood a subsequent day, she would treat that blood as if it was the continuation of her menstruation and she would go to the mikveh after seven days [Remember, according to the Torah one is impure for seven days after menstruation begins, even if it continues for several days]. According to rabbinic law, she should have begun the count only when actual menstrual blood began. Going to the mikveh too early will be ineffective (according to rabbinic law). Thus, Samaritan women will always be unclean. The men who have relations with them are also unclean and they will always defile any number of cushions upon which they sit, which is the rule concerning one who has relations with a menstruant (see Kelim 1:3).   
We should note that by declaring all Samaritans impure from birth, the rabbis were able to distance themselves from them. This in my opinion is probably a strong part of the reason for the laws of this mishnah. The rabbis are using the laws of niddah to distance Samaritans from mingling with their community. However, we should also note that simultaneously the Mishnah defines Samaritans as Jews, at least in a genetic sense. Mishnah three deals with Gentiles, and Samaritans are not considered Gentiles.
Section three: However, it is not certain that all Samirtan women (and men) are unclean, since the women do go to the mikveh. It is theoretically possible that they went to the mikveh on the correct day. Therefore, they only defile due to doubt. If a rabbinic Jew is defiled by contact with a Samaritan, and then he enters the Temple, he is not liable for entering the Temple while impure. If he touches terumah, the terumah is not burned (although it may not be eaten). These two rules always apply in cases of doubtful terumah.    

