Niddah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
The blood of a Gentile and the clean blood of a metzoraat (a woman with scale disease):
Bet Shammai declares clean.
And Bet Hillel holds that it is like her spittle or her urine.
The blood of a woman after childbirth who did not immerse [in a mikveh]: 
Bet Shammai says it is like her spittle or her urine,  
But Bet Hillel says: it conveys uncleanness both when wet and when dry.
They agree that if she gave birth while in zivah, it conveys uncleanness both when wet and when dry.

Explanation
Section one: The menstrual blood (or zivah blood, blood that flows when a woman is not supposed to be menstruating) of a Gentile is, according to Bet Shammai, pure. This is because the chapters in Leviticus that discuss this issue are addressed to "the children of Israel" (Leviticus 15:2). 
"Clean blood" is the blood that flows from a woman during the period after childbirth following her time of impurity. For a boy, she is impure for a week and then pure for 33 days and double that amount of time for a girl. According to Bet Shammai, even if the woman is a metzoraat, who is impure, her blood is pure during this period, just as the blood of any woman is pure during this period.
Bet Hillel disagrees on both of these issues. Concerning the blood of Gentile women, while Bet Hillel agrees that it is not impure by virtue of Torah law, they hold that the rabbis declared it impure (it would be impure derabanan). Just as they declared that other fluids that come from a Gentile's body are impure, urine and spittle, so too is their menstrual blood. This means that it defiles when moist, but not when dry, as do urine and spittle.
Similarly, the rabbis hold that the "clean blood" of a metzoraat defiles like her spittle and urine—when wet and not when dry. 
We could summarize the debate in the following way: Bet Shammai considers this blood not to be like the other fluids that come from the body, urine and spittle. Therefore, for both of these women, their urine and spittle can be impure while their blood is pure. Bet Hillel groups the blood with the other fluids, and just as urine and spittle are impure, so too is blood.
Section two: Seven days after the birth of a boy and 14 days after the birth of a girl a woman is supposed to go to the mikveh, and subsequent blood will be pure. If she does not go to the mikveh, Bet Shammai says that this blood is like other liquids in her body—it will defile when wet and not when dry. This is because she is still unclean, even though her blood is clean (i.e. the blood doesn't defile because it is blood, but rather because it is bodily fluid). Bet Hillel says that the blood is like menstrual blood—i.e. it defiles because it is blood and not just because it is a fluid. This means that it will defile even when dry.
Section three: Both houses agree that if she gave birth while in a state of zivah, meaning while she was impure due to non-menstrual blood, her blood defiles as would menstrual blood, until she goes to the mikveh, after seven days for a boy and 14 days for a girl. In other words, the fact that this is supposed to be "clean blood" does not get her out of the fact that she had unclean blood before she even gave birth. 

