Niddah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
If a woman was in hard labor during the eighty days prescribed for the birth of a female, all kinds of blood that she may observe are clean, until the fetus is born. 
But Rabbi Eliezer holds them to be unclean.   
They said to Rabbi Eliezer: if in a case where the law was stringent in regard to blood discharged in the absence of pain, it was nevertheless lenient in regard to blood discharged during hard labor, in a case where it was lenient in regard to blood discharged in the absence of pain is there not even more reason to be lenient in regard to blood discharged during hard labor?   
He replied: it is enough for the case inferred to be treated in the same manner as the one from which it is inferred. For in what way were you lenient upon her? From the uncleanness of a zivah, but she does have the uncleanness of a niddah. 

Explanation
Section one: This mishnah discusses an unlikely scenario, but one that the rabbis found interesting (in a legal sort of way) and therefore, worthy of discussion. [This is frequently the case in rabbinic literature. The rabbis wish to discuss legally complex cases, not ones that actually happen most frequently].
A woman gave birth to a girl and then was impure for 14 days. After this time she went to the mikveh and then had relations with her husband (I know, a bit quick, but possible). She became pregnant and was already having pain and blood during the 66 day period in which the blood is considered pure. Note that she knows that this blood is from the new pregnancy, and not the old one. The rabbis hold that this blood is clean until she gives birth again. At this point, if we are sure it is a birth, then she will again be impure with birth uncleanness.
Rabbi Eliezer says that since we know that this blood is not from the previous birth, in which case it would be clean, but rather from the difficult labor due to the subsequent birth, we must consider this blood to be unclean. She will have the uncleanness of a menstruant, as was the case in yesterday's mishnah.
Section two: The rabbis now argue out their position.  A woman who is pregnant and discharges blood but doesn't have any labor pains is considered a zavah. Her blood is not considered menstrual—rather the greater stringency of zivah applies. Nevertheless, if she was in hard labor at the time, the blood would be considered birth blood, which would give her the status of a niddah and not a zavah. 
Therefore, in a case where the law is generally lenient, during the days of her purity (the 80 days after the birth of a girl), when all her blood is considered pure, so too we should be lenient with regard to blood that comes from labor pains. She should be a niddah and not a zavah. 
Section three: Rabbi Eliezer responds that this doesn't make sense. The leniency during pregnancy was that she was not a zavah—she was only a niddah. So when we derive a law from this situation, we don't need to say that she is pure. It is enough to say that the derived status is the same as that from which it derived. Just as her blood had the status of niddah during her pregnancy, so too during the 80 days of purity, blood due to hard labor has the status of niddah.  

