Niddah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with when we believe the testimony of a Samaritan. 

Mishnah Five
They are believed when they say, "we buried miscarriages there," or "we did not bury them." 
They are believed when they say concerning a beast whether it had given birth to a firstling or had not given birth to one. 
They are believed when giving information on the marking of graves.
But they are not believed either in regard to overhanging branches, or protruding stones or a bet ha-peras.   
This is the general rule: in any matter in which they are under suspicion they are not believed.

Explanation
Section one: If a Samaritan states that they either did or did not bury a miscarriage in a certain place they are believed. Although they are suspected of casting aside miscarriages, they generally observe the laws of impurity, so they are believed in this matter.
Section two: Since they observe the laws of the firstborn animal (that it must be given to the priests and that it is sacred) they are trusted if they say that a certain animal had already given birth or had not. 
Section three: Samaritans are cautious concerning the impurity of graves. Therefore, they are trusted to say that a marker does or does not signify the presence of a grave.
Section four: However, there are aspects of the laws of impurity in which their behavior and interpretation differ from the rabbis. The rabbis hold that an overhanging tree or a protruding stone can serve as an "ohel," a tent which will convey impurity from one thing underneath it to another (we learned a lot about this in Ohalot). The Samaritans evidently don't follow these rules. Therefore, they are not believed to say that such and such a place is pure.
A "bet ha-peras" is a place that used to be a graveyard but has been plowed over such that it is difficult to tell what it used to be. The Samaritans evidently are not concerned with the impurity of a "bet ha-peras" and therefore are not believed if they say that a certain place was not plowed over.
Section five:  This is the general rule that underlies when a Samaritan is believed and when she/he is not. We should note what this implies about our trust of Samaritans. When Samaritans observe a certain law, we trust that they will tell us (rabbinic Jews) the truth about it. They won't just lie because they don't like us. However, they don't like the cases in which our laws disagree with their way of treating things. In those cases, we fear that they will intentionally lie to us so that we can't observe the system of purity as we understand it. 
 

