Niddah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Today's mishnah continues to deal with the purity status of a woman following the one week or two weeks after childbirth.

Mishnah Seven
But they agree that she may eat second tithe.
And she may set aside her hallah, bring it near to the dough and call it by its name.
And if any of her spit or her pure blood fell on a loaf of terumah it remains clean.
Bet Shammai says: she requires immersion at the end [of her days of purification],
Bet Hillel says: she does not require immersion at the end. 

Explanation
Section one: Just as a tvul yom (see yesterday's mishnah) can eat second tithe, so too the woman who gave birth. 
Section two: She will defile challah, the portion of bread separated and given to the priest. Therefore, we need to find a way for her to bake bread without defiling the challah. What she does is first separate the piece of dough that will be challah without yet calling it challah. It will not be defiled by her because it is not yet challah. She then puts the future challah in a vessel near the other dough because it is a mitzvah to take challah from adjacent dough. Then she can call it challah and no longer touch it. 
Section three: Fluid that comes out of a tvul yom is pure. Thus if the childbearing woman's spit or blood falls on a loaf of terumah, the terumah remains pure. 
Section four: The two houses disagree whether a woman requires an additional immersion after the 33 or 66 days of "pure blood" that follow childbirth (she would have gone to the mikveh after 7 or 14 days). Bet Shammai seems to feel uncomfortable that a woman should go from a state of any level of impurity to a state of full purity without immersion in a mikveh. They also might hold that the main immersion of a childbearing woman comes at the end of the full period, and not the first part of it (7 days for a boy, 14 for a girl). Therefore, she requires another immersion.
Bet Hillel seems to hold that since the Torah doesn't require her to go to a mikveh, she is not required. 

