Niddah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Most of this rather long mishnah is a more complicated version of yesterday's mishnah, concerning three women who were sleeping in one bed and a stain was found under one of them.

Mishnah Five
If three women slept in one bed, and blood was found under the middle one, they are all unclean. 
If it was found under the inner one, the two inner ones are unclean while the outer one is clean. 
If it was found under the outer one, the two outer ones are unclean while the inner one is clean. 
Rabbi Judah said: when is this so?  When they passed by way of the foot of the bed, but if they passed across it, they are all unclean.
If one of them examined herself and was found clean, she remains clean while the two others are unclean. 
If two examined themselves and were found to be clean they remain clean while the third is unclean. 
If the three examined themselves and were found to be clean, they are all unclean. 
To what may this be compared? To an unclean heap that was mixed up with two clean heaps:
If they examined one of them and found it to be clean, it is clean while the two others are unclean; 
If they examined two of the heaps and found them to be clean, they are clean while the third one is unclean; 
And if they examined the three and they were all found to be clean, they are all unclean, the words of Rabbi Meir, 
For Rabbi Meir used to say: any object that is presumed to be unclean remains unclean until it is known to you where the uncleanness is. 
But the sages say: one continues the examination of the heap until one reaches bedrock or virgin soil.   

Explanation
Section one: The bed is up against the wall and there are three women sleeping in the bed. The simple principle is that the woman under whom the stain was found and the women sleeping right next to her are impure.  The idea seems to be that the women might shift a bit at night, but not so much that they could get all the way to the position of a woman two over.
We should note that this mishnah seems to disagree with mishnah four, for mishnah four stated that if the blood was found under any one of them, they are all impure. 
Section two: Rabbi Judah points out that this is true only if the women got into the bed from the feet of the bed. However, if they crossed over each other from the outside part of the bed, then all are impure because the blood flow could have occurred while they were entering the bed. 
Rabbi Judah could attribute yesterday's mishnah to a case where they were crossing over each other to get into bed.
Section three: This is similar to yesterday's mishnah.
Section four: The mishnah analogizes the previous scenario with a case in which there are three heaps of stones and we know that under one of them is a piece of corpse but we don't know under which. According to Rabbi Meir if they examine all three heaps and don't find the piece of corpse under any of them, they are all impure. Even though the source was never found, since we know it is there, they are all impure.
Section five: This accords with Rabbi Meir's general principle of impurity. Once something is under the presumption of impurity, it stays impure until we are sure where the source of uncleanness is. 
However, the rabbis say that in situations such as the heaps where the source of impurity has not been found, we can assume it is gone and all of the heaps are pure. However, in the case of the women, one of them is certainly the source of the blood and they are all still here in front of us. Therefore, they are all impure.  

