Niddah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
All bloodstains, wherever they are found are clean except those that are found in rooms or in a house for unclean women.
A house for unclean Samaritan women conveys uncleanness by overshadowing   because they bury miscarriages there. 
Rabbi Judah says: they did not bury them but threw them away and the wild beasts dragged them off.

Explanation
Section one: As stated in yesterday's mishnah, bloodstains found on clothing are considered pure, because we can generally assume that they do not come from menstrual blood. Jewish women do not simply cast aside the clothing that has menstrual blood stains on it. 
However, we can't assume that the bloodstain is not menstrual if the clothing is found in a private room, for in such a place a woman might place clothing that has a menstrual stain on it.
Similarly, if bloodstained clothing is found in a house set aside from menstruating women, we must treat the stain as if it were menstrual blood.
We should note that this is virtually the only evidence in rabbinic literature that menstruating women were sent to a "red tent"—a house for menstruants. It is unclear how widespread this practice might have been, but in my opinion, the existence of this mishnah proves that it did exist, at least in some places in some times. 
Section two: Houses set aside for unclean Samaritan women defile to a greater extent because we fear there may be dead bodies in such houses, and dead bodies defile through overshadowing. The fear is that in such houses women occasionally miscarriage, and that Samaritan women do not bring their miscarriages to burial grounds. Rather they bury them right in the house. 
Rabbi Judah says that they don't even bother burying them. They just leave them on the side and wild animals come and drag them off. Paradoxically, the aspersion he casts on Samaritan women (they don't even bother burying their miscarriages) serves to purify their homes, at least from corpse impurity. Since the miscarriages are no longer there, the houses do not defile by overshadowing.  

