Niddah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
If a woman aborted a tumtum or an androginos, she must sit for a male and a female.  
[If she gave birth] to a tumtum and a male, or to an androginos and a male, she must sit for a male and a female.   
[If she gave birth] to a tumtum and a female or an androginos and a female, she must sit only for a female.   
If the embryo came out in pieces or in a reversed position it is deemed born as soon as its greater part come out. 
If it came out in the normal way [it is not deemed born] until the greater part of its head came out. 
And what is meant by the "greater part of its head"? Once the forehead comes out.

Explanation
Section one:  A tumtum is one who has no recognizable signs of gender. An androginos has both male and female signs. If a woman gives birth to either of these, she must act stringently and be impure for both a male and female (see mishnah two). Again, what this means is that she is impure for as long as she would be if she gave birth to a female and pure only for as long as she would be had she given birth to a female.
Section two: In this case, she gave birth to a child of doubtful status and a certain male. Therefore, she must sit for both a male and female (in case the tumtum or andrigonos is female).
Section three: Here we know she gave birth to a female. Therefore, she is impure for the longer period (14 days). And as far as the days of purity, she certainly is pure for the 66 day period, even if the tumtum or andrigonos was a male.
Section four: The final two sections deal with the question of when a birth has been determined to have taken place. Some of the ramifications of this include when it is allowed to abort the pregnancy to save the woman's life and at what point does she become impure. 
If it comes out in pieces or legs first, the birth is determined as occurring once most of the body has come out.
Section five: If the birth occurs in a normal way, head first, then the birth is considered to have taken place once the forehead is out. This is the definition of "most of the head."   

