Niddah, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a woman examining oneself to see if she had begun to menstruate.  

Mishnah One
Every hand that makes frequent examination: 
In the case of women is praiseworthy,  
But in the case of men it ought to be cut off.  
In the case of a deaf, an person not of sound senses, a blind or an insane woman, if other women of sound senses are available they attend to her, and they may eat terumah. 
It is the custom of the daughters of Israel to have intercourse using two testing-rags, one for the man and the other for herself.
Virtuous women prepare also a third rag to prepare the "house" [before intercourse]. 

Explanation
Section one: The rabbis consider it praiseworthy for a woman to frequently examine herself to see if she has begun to menstruate. Such frequent examinations would ensure that she didn't defile vessels and food and it would make sure that she didn't have intercourse while menstruating.
However, the rabbis took quite a strict stance against male masturbation. "Spilling the seed" was a grave sin according to rabbinic halakhah. The rabbis feared that a man who frequently checked to see if he had ejaculated would cause himself (either intentionally or unintentionally) to ejaculate. Therefore, men should not frequently examine themselves.
Section two: The categories of women listed in this mishnah are not considered to have "da'at" which I usually translate as awareness. Here it seems to mean that they are not able to be responsible for themselves to determine when they are menstruating. If they have other women attending to them, they may eat terumah, which may only be done by a pure person. 
Section three: According to the mishnah, Jewish women have the custom of checking themselves by using two testing rags—one to test herself and the other to give to her husband to see if blood was found on him. This blood would be a sign that she is menstruating. 
"Virtuous" (alt. "modest") women examine themselves not only after intercourse but before as well to make sure that she is pure.  
The mishnah refers to a woman's vagina as "the house." This same phrase is used in Mikvaot 8:4. I'm guessing that nicknames for a person's genitals is a cultural universal. 

