Niddah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The rabbis distinguished pure blood (blood that is not considered to have come from the uterus) from impure blood (uterine blood) by virtue of its color. In our mishnah the rabbis list which colors are pure and which are not.

Mishnah Six
Five kinds of blood in a woman are unclean: red, black, like bright crocus, like earthy water, or like diluted wine.  
Bet Shammai says: also like fenugreek water or the juice of roasted meat.
But Bet Hillel declares these clean. 
One that is yellow: 
Akavia ben Mahalalel declares unclean 
And the sages declare clean. 
Rabbi Meir said: even if it does not convey uncleanness as a bloodstain it conveys uncleanness as a liquid.  
Rabbi Yose says: it does neither the one nor the other.  

Explanation
Section one: All of these shades are considered to be menstrual blood and are impure. Tomorrow's mishnah will further describe these shades and what real world things actually look like them. 
Section two: Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel disagree as to whether blood the color or fenugreek water or the juice of roasted meat is impure. This is likely a very weak red color.
Section three: We should note that the word that I have translated here as yellow is actually green. The truth is that in the ancient world the two colors were often identified as one. Indeed the words for yellow and green don't even appear that often in the Mishnah (mostly in Tractate Negaim). Since blood is usually red, it is likely that the word "green" here means a pale color, such as that of an etrog. In any case, the status of this blood is also disputed.
Section four: Referring to this yellow blood, Rabbi Meir says that while he agrees with Rabbi Akiva that this blood does not count as a menstrual stain, the blood is still impure because it is a liquid that comes from a menstruant. As we will learn in 4:3, urine and spit that come from a menstruant (and some other categories of impure people) are impure.
Rabbi Yose disagrees with Rabbi Meir and says that according to those sages who say that such blood is not menstrual blood, it is also not impure due to liquid impurity. Only spit and urine are impure. 

