Niddah, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah talks about the purity of a woman during the period where she is "dwelling in clean blood." Such a woman gave birth and went to the mikveh either 7 days after the birth of a boy or 14 days after the birth of a girl. For a boy, she now has pure blood for the following 33 days and for a girl for 66 days. During this period her purity status is like that of a "t'vul yom" a person who has been to the mikveh but has not yet had the sun set. Such a person has a secondary form of impurity.  

Mishnah Six
In earlier times they used to say: a woman who is dwelling in clean blood may pour out water for [washing] the pesah sacrifice.   
They changed their minds and said: in respect of consecrated food she is like one who came in contact with a person that was subject to corpse uncleanness, this is according to the words of Bet Hillel. 
Bet Shammai says: even as one who is subject to corpse uncleanness.   

Explanation
Section one: Originally, they used to say that such a woman can pour water out of a vessel to wash off a pesah sacrifice. A person who has secondary impurity does not defile the vessel in which the water is held. She shouldn't touch the water itself, for the rabbis considered it disgraceful that the pesach sacrifice should be in contact with water touched by a t'vul yom. However, they didn't worry lest she touch the waters, because even if she did, non-sacred water cannot be defiled by a t'vul yom.
Section two: That was the original opinion. Afterwards, assumedly by the time of Bet Hillel and Bet Shammai (1st century C.E.) they changed her status to be like a person who had contact with another person who had corpse impurity. Such a person has first degree impurity, and if she were to touch the water, she would defile it and the water would defile the pesah sacrifice.
Bet Shammai rules even more strictly—she is treated as if she herself touched a corpse. She would be a "father of impurity" and she would even defile the vessel she touches. 

