Niddah, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
If she lent her shirt to a non-Jewish woman or to a menstruant she may attribute a stain to either.   
If three women had worn the same shirt or had sat on the same wooden bench and subsequently blood was found on it, all are regarded as unclean.   
If they had sat on a stone bench or on the projection within the colonnade of a bath House:
Rabbi Nehemiah says that they are clean, for Rabbi Nehemiah says: anything that is not susceptible to uncleanness is not susceptible to stains.  

Explanation
Section one: A woman didn't check her shirt for stains before she lent it out to another woman. She then got it back with a blood stain on it (yeah, bad manners, but that is not the issue in this mishnah).  Alternatively, she did check it before she lent it out, but when she got it back she wore it for a while without checking it. In both cases, she doesn't know if the stain is from her or from the other woman. The mishnah rules that if the woman was non-Jewish or a menstruant who are both considered impure, then she can assume that the stain is from them. It seems that the mishnah is saying that they won't be so particular about a blood stain found on a shirt. However, if the shirt was loaned out to a pure Jewish woman, the lender can't assume that the stain was from the borrower because the borrower would be assumed to be clean and would be cautious about such matters. 
Section two: In this case, there is no reason to attribute the blood stain to any one woman more than to another and therefore they all must be considered unclean.
Section three: Stone objects are not susceptible to impurity. The projection from the colonnade is probably not made of stone but since it is attached to the ground, it too cannot become impure because any object attached to the ground cannot become impure. According to Rabbi Nehemiah, the rabbis decided that stains are a sign of impurity only if they appear on other things that are susceptible to impurity. If they appear on objects that are not susceptible, then the woman remains pure. Note that this again seems to be an intentional leniency designed to allow a greater percentage of women to remain pure.   

