Niddah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the age at which a child's vows are considered valid. This is an intellectual capacity and not a physical capacity as was the case in the first five mishnayot of the chapter.
The vows discussed directly in this mishnah are biblical types of vows—a vow to bring something to the Temple. However, the same laws apply to other types of vows as well. 
We should also note that the ages in this mishnah reflect what in modern times is known as the "bar/bat mitzvah." A celebration of this age did not occur in mishnaic/talmudic times, but the significance of the age was noted. 

Mishnah Six
A girl of the age of eleven years and one day, her vows must be examined.
A girl of the age of twelve years and one day, her vows are valid;  
And they examine them throughout the whole twelfth year. 
A boy the age of twelve years and one day, his vows must be examined.
A boy the age of thirteen years and one day, is vow are valid.
And they examine them throughout the whole thirteenth year.   
Prior to this age,  even though they said, "We know to whom we have made our vow" or "to whom we have made our dedication," their vow  is not a valid vow and their dedication is not a valid dedication. 
Subsequent to this age, even though they said, "We do not know to whom we have made our vow" or "to whom we have made our vow," their vow is a valid vow and their dedication is a valid dedication.

Explanation
Section one: During a girls' twelfth year it is possible, although not certain, that she knows the meaning of her vows. Therefore if she makes a vow someone would have to ascertain that she understands its meaning. If she does, it is valid. 
Upon completing twelve years, meaning on her twelfth birthday (actually the day after), her vows are valid automatically.
Section two: Boys mature one year slower than girls (personally, I think it takes a lot longer than this, but that's based on personal experience). Therefore, they are checked during their thirteenth year and a day after their thirteenth birthday their vows are automatically valid. 
Section three: Prior to these ages, a child's vows don't count, even if they know the meaning of them. And subsequent to this age, the vows count, even if they don't know their meaning. The only age in which the matter is dependent upon their knowledge, is the twelfth year for the girl and the thirteenth year for the boy. 

