Niddah, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with a woman who finds a bloodstain on her body or her clothing. Does she have to be concerned that it is menstrual blood and therefore she (and the cloak) is impure?

Mishnah One
If a woman observed a bloodstain on her body:  
If it was opposite her genital area she is unclean;
But if it was not near the genital are she remains clean. 
If it was on her heel or on the tip of her large toe, she is unclean.  
On her thigh or on her feet: 
If on the inner side, she is unclean; 
If on their outer side, she remains clean.
And if on the front and back sides  she remains clean. 
If she observed it on her garment: 
Below the belt, she is unclean,  
But if above the belt, she remains clean. 
If she observed it on the sleeve of her shirt: 
If it  can reach as low as her genital area, she is unclean,  
But if it cannot, she remains clean. 
If she takes it off and covers herself with it in the night, she is unclean wherever the stain is found, since it can turn about.  
And the same law applies to a pallium.

Explanation
Section one: If she finds the stain on her body close to her genital region or opposite this area, it is likely to be menstrual and she is impure. If the stain is not near there, then she might still be impure, but it will depend on where it is found, as we shall see now.
Section two:  This section explains what is also considered opposite her genital area. Her heels and the tips of her large toe are both opposite the genitals because she might sit cross-legged with her heels under her body.
Section three: If on the inner sides of her feet or thighs, it is possible that the blood is menstrual. Therefore, she is impure. However, if it is on the outer sides or on the front or back, it can be assumed to be from elsewhere and she is clean. 
Section four: The rest of the mishnah is concerned with blood found on her garment. If it is below the belt, then it is possibly menstrual blood and she is unclean. But if above the belt, she is clean.
Section five: If the blood was on the sleeve, we are concerned that it is menstrual only if the sleeve can reach down past her waist.
Section six: If she uses the cloak as a covering at night, then no matter where the blood is found, she must be considered impure because at night the cloak won't stay in one place. Even if she only put it around her head, it is possible she tossed and turned and that it ended up near her groin.
Section seven: The same rules apply to a Roman type of garment called a "pallium" or a "pallios" in other versions. This was a type of jacket. 
 

