Niddah, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
Today's mishnah returns to the main subject of the chapter—at what stage of physical development a child becomes obligated in the commandments.

Mishnah Eleven
If a girl has grown two pubic hairs she may perform either halitzah or contract levirate marriage, and she is obligated in all the commandments in the Torah. 
So too if a boy has grown two pubic hairs, he is obligated in all of the commandments in the Torah. 
He is fit to become a wayward and rebellious son from the time he has grown two hairs until the time when his beard forms a circle.  
This refers to the lower, and not to the upper one, but the sages spoke using a euphemism.  
A girl who has grown two hairs may no longer refuse the marriage. 
Rabbi Judah says: [she may refuse] until the black [hairs] predominate.   

Explanation
Section one: Once the "lower sign"—two pubic hairs—have appeared on a boy or girl, they become fully obligated in all of the mitzvot in the Torah. In addition, for a girl this means that she is liable for halitzah or yibbum; if her husband died without offspring, she must perform either halitzah or yibbum with her dead husband's brother.
Section two: For a boy to be subject to the laws of being a wayward and rebellious son (see Sanhedrin 8) he must have reached majority age, but not be so old that he is no longer subject to his parents' authority. This is translated physically to mean that he has already grown two pubic hairs but he is not yet fully physically matured (meaning more pubic hair is left to grow). The beard referred to here is indeed the "lower" beard, but the rabbis used a euphemism (I'm trying to do this too, but it's not easy and to remain understood).
Section three: A minor girl who is married off by her brother or mother because her father is no longer alive has the right to refuse the marriage until she becomes of majority age. In Hebrew, this is called "meun," and it is annulment, not divorce. Once she hits puberty and doesn't refuse the marriage, it is as if she has accepted it and she can no longer refuse. Rabbi Judah extends her right to refuse the marriage till the time when she has enough pubic hair that the region looks mostly black.   

