Bava Kamma Chapter Seven Mishnayot Six and Seven

Introduction
Mishnah six continues to define the moment from which a thief is considered to be a thief and will therefore become obligated for twofold restitution.  Jewish law has an intricate system of acquisition or kinyan (see Steinsaltz reference guide for a brief discussion).  In order for the thief to become obligated he must have acquired the object.
Mishnah seven does not deal with a subject integral to our chapter.  It is somewhat puzzling why it is placed here. In any case it deals mostly with animals which are forbidden to raise in certain places and under certain conditions.

Mishnah Six 
If while he was dragging [a sheep or ox] out it died in the owner’s domain, he is exempt.
But if he had lifted it or taken it out of the owner’s domain and it died, he is liable.
If he brought it as the firstborn offering for his son, or gave it to his creditor, or to an unpaid guardian, or to a borrower, or to a paid guardian, or to a hirer, and one of them was dragging it away and it died in the owner’s domain, he is exempt.
If [one of them] had lifted it up or taken it outside the owner’s domain, he is liable.

Explanation
This mishnah notes two ways of acquiring an animal: by lifting or by dragging it (i.e. pulling it).  The first type of acquisition is effective even if the animal is still on the property of its owner.  Therefore according to 1a and 2a if a person should lift the animal he is considered a thief, and if the animal dies he will be obligated to make restitution.  However, dragging the animal effects acquisition only once the animal is off the property of its original owner.  Therefore, if the thief were to do so on the property of the owner and the animal were to die he would not be obligated to make restitution.
Section two emphasizes that even if the thief had given the animal to someone else as payment, either to a priest in order to redeem his first born (see Numbers 18:15-16), or to a creditor or he had given the animal to anyone else who takes possession of the animal, he is still not legally liable as a thief until someone either lifts the animal or takes it off the owner’s property.

