Bava Kamma Chapter Nine Mishnayoth Ten and Eleven

Introduction
Mishnah ten deals with a scenario similar to the one dealt with in mishnah nine.  Mishnah nine was concerned with the laws of inheritance in a case where a son stole from his father and the father subsequently died.  The mishnah created a way in which the robbing son could still retain his inheritance.  Our mishnah deals with the inheritance of a son whose father took an oath that the son could not benefit from his property.

Mishnah eleven deals with a robber who steals from a convert who subsequently dies.  A convert’s non-Jewish relatives do not inherit his money (at least according to Torah law) and therefore a convert who dies before he has children has no legal inheritors.  Our mishnah deals with this case, and in extension any case in which the original owner of the property died before the property was returned to him, and did not leave inheritors.

Mishnah Ten
If a man said to his son, “Qonam, you will not derive any benefit from that which is mine”, and he died, the son may inherit him.
[But if he moreover said], “Both during my life and at my death”, when he dies the son may not inherit from him and he must restore [what he received from his father’s inheritance] to the [father’s] sons or brothers.
If he has nothing, he takes out a loan, and the creditors come and exact payment.  

Explanation
The word “Qonam” is a nickname that people used in Mishnaic times for the word “Qorban” which means “sacrifice”. If a person wanted to make an oath forbidding his things on someone else or someone else’s things on himself, he would say that the things he wishes to forbid should be like a sacrifice.  Sacrifices were generally forbidden for public consumption.  The person taking the oath is in essence saying that the item mentioned should be forbidden like a sacrifice.  In the case mentioned in our mishnah the father says that his property should be “qonam” or forbidden to one of his sons.  Section one of the mishnah tells us that this will be true only during the father’s life.  In this case the oath does not have effect after death and the son may receive his proper share of the inheritance.
In the scenario in section two the father swears that his property should be forbidden to his son both during his life and after his death.  In this case the son cannot take part in the inheritance and he must return anything which he has taken from the inheritance to the other inheritors (generally the father’s sons or brothers).
According to section three there is a way for the son to get around this problem.  If the son is poor and dependent on his share of the inheritance he may borrow the sum of his inheritance and then the creditors can collect from the other inheritors.  In this way he receives the amount due to him as part of his inheritance without benefiting directly from his father’s estate.
