Bava Kamma Chapter Nine Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today deal with craftsmen who receive objects on which to work and somehow ruin the object during the course of their work.  In the previous mishnah we discussed the obligation of a robber to return the object to the original owner at its value at the time of theft.  The editor of the Mishnah found these laws to be loosely associated with the obligation that a craftsmen has to return an object on which he was working to the original owner.  The similarity between the two situations is that both a robber and a craftsmen who was contracted to work on an object belonging to another person must return objects to their original owner.  The major difference is of course that the craftsmen received the object at the behest of the owner, unlike the robber who stole the object.  In any case, this is a good example of how the Mishnah will associate different subjects and occasionally teach their laws in juxtaposition.

Mishnah Three
If he gave [something] to craftsmen to repair, and they ruined it, they must make restitution.  
If he gave a carpenter a box, chest or cupboard to repair, and he ruined it, he must make restitution.
If a builder undertook to pull down a wall, and he broke the stones or caused damage, he must make restitution.
If he was pulling down at the one end and it fell down on the other, he is exempt; 
However, if it fell due to the blow, he is liable.

Explanation
Sections one and two teach that workmen/craftsmen whom receive an object on which to work, are obligated to make restitution for the object, should they ruin it.  This may sound a bit obvious, but it is not necessarily so.  Indeed many of us have probably had arguments over just this topic with modern day repairmen.  The mishnah squarely places responsibility for the object in the hands of the craftsmen. 
Section three is slightly more complex.  In this scenario a builder was hired to take down a wall.  In the times of the mishnah building material was scarce, especially in the Land of Israel (it is still scarce here).  When the owner hired the builder to take down the wall the intention was not to ruin the stones but rather to use them to build something else.  If the builder took them down and ruined the stones, he has not fulfilled his job as is expected of him, and therefore will be liable for the damage.  Similarly if he should cause damage during the process, he is personally liable.  If, however, the wall should fall at the opposite end of his work, the assumption is that it fell due to other circumstances, and he will not be held liable.  Finally, the mishnah lets us know, that if it fell at the opposite end, but it nevertheless fell due to his breaking down the wall, he is liable.



  
