Mishnah Four
If a man gave wool to a dyer and the cauldron burned it, he must repay him the value of the wool.  
If he dyed it badly: if the improvement was worth more than the cost of the dying, he must pay him the cost of the dying; if the cost of the dying was worth more than the improvement, he must pay only [the value of the] improvement.
If he told him to dye it red and he dyed it black; black and he dyed it red:
Rabbi Meir says:  “[The dyer] must pay the cost of the wool.”
Rabbi Judah says:  “If the improvement was worth more than the cost of the dying, he must pay him the cost of the dying; if the cost of the dying was worth more than the improvement, he must pay only [the value of the] improvement.

Explanation
In section one, a person gave wool to a dyer to dye.  If, while in the process of dying the wool, he should burn the wool, he is certainly obligated to return the value of the wool.  This halacha is completely consistent with those mentioned in the previous mishnah.
Sections two and three are more complicated.  In these two sections the dyer did not render the wool unusable but rather either dyed it badly (section two) or dyed it the wrong color (section three).  If he dyed it badly the original owner will still have to pay for the dying, but only the lesser of two amounts:  the cost of the dying or the rise in the value of the wool.  Let us say that the wool was originally worth 10 dollars.  If it cost 2 dollars to dye the wool badly, and after the dying it was worth 13 dollars, the owner owes the dyer 2 dollars, the lesser of the two amounts.  If it cost 2 dollars to dye and now it is worth 11 dollars, the owner owes the dyer 1 dollar, again, the lesser of the two amounts.  Note, in a normal circumstance they would have agreed on an amount prior to the dying, an amount certainly higher than the cost of the dying.  Since the dyer did not properly perform his duty he does not receive the full expected payment.
If the owner dyed the wool in a proper fashion, but dyed it the wrong color, Rabbi Judah says that the law is the same as in section two.  The owner must pay the dyer the lower of the two amounts:  the cost of the dying or the increased value of the wool.  However, according to Rabbi Meir he must pay back the original value of the wool, 10 dollars in our example above.

Questions for Further Thought:
What will the law be if the dyer dyed the wool badly and the 10 dollar wool is now worth 9 dollars?  