Bava Kamma Chapter Ten Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three deals with the problem of stolen property being sold and acquired in the marketplace and the rights of the original owner to have his property returned to him.
Mishnah four deals with the case where a person saves his fellow’s property, even though by doing so he causes a loss to his own property.  The mishnah is concerned with the obligation to compensate the rescuer for his loss of property.

Mishnah Three
If a man recognized his utensils or books in another’s hands and a report of theft had gone out in the town, the purchaser swears how much he paid and takes this price [from the owner and restores the goods].
But if [such a report had] not [gone out], he [the original owner] does not have the power, for I might say that he had first sold them to another and this one bought it from him.

Explanation
In the case mentioned in this mishnah, Reuven sees that Shimon has something that belonged to him (Reuven) originally.  Shimon claims that he bought the item in the marketplace from another person.  If it was known in the city that these objects had been stolen from Reuven, for instance if he had complained about them before he saw them in Shimon’s possession, then Shimon must swear how much he had paid for the items and Reuven will pay Shimon and take back his possessions.  In other words, even if Shimon does not wish to sell the items, since it is known that they were originally Reuven’s, Shimon must sell them.  However, Reuven will in any case be obligated to pay Shimon whatever Shimon had paid for the object.
If, however, there is no report of that the item was stolen from Reuven, we do not allow him to force Shimon to sell him the items.  This is true even if it is known that the items once belonged to Reuven, for instance it was a piece of clothing that everyone had seen him wear.  Since Reuven cannot prove that he did not sell the items to someone else, and that Shimon then bought them from this person, he cannot force Shimon to sell them back.



      
