Shevuoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Mishnah three discusses one who entered the Temple while impure.  

Mishnah Three
If he became impure while in the Temple court [and was aware of it], and then forgot that he was impure, though he remembered that he was in the Temple; 
[Or] he forgot that he was in the Temple, though he remembered that he was impure;
[Or,] he forgot both; 
And he prostrated himself, or waited [in the Temple] the time it takes to prostrate; 
Or went out the long way, he is liable; 
[If he went out] the shorter way, he is not liable; 
This is the positive precept concerning the temple for which they [the court] are not liable. 

Explanation—Mishnah Three 
Section one:  This section is similar to the teaching in mishnah one, except it presents a new problem:  he is actually in the Temple while he becomes impure. Since it is forbidden to be in the Temple while impure he therefore must leave immediately, and in the shortest possible manner.  To remind ourselves, in order for him to be liable for a sliding scale sacrifice for having been in the Temple while impure he must have awareness, forgetting and then afterwards awareness.  Our mishnah teaches that the forgetting can either be of the fact he was impure or that he was in the Temple or both.  As long as he knew what had happened or where he was and forgot one of those two things or both, and then he worshipped in the Temple by prostrating himself, or even stayed in the Temple long enough to prostrate, or even did not take the quickest way out, he is obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.  In other words, should he delay himself at all within the Temple after having become impure he will be obligated for a sliding scale sacrifice.  Only if he goes out immediately will he be exempt.
Section two:  Usually, if the court gives a mistaken ruling with regards to a mitzvah that is punishable if done intentionally by kareth and obligates one for a sacrifice if done unintentionally, the court must bring a bullock as a sacrifice (see Leviticus 4:12).  However, in this case, if the court told the person who had become impure while in the Temple that it was okay to leave through a longer path, the court is not obligated to bring the sacrifice.  We will learn this law again in Tractate Horayoth 2:4, the last tractate in Seder Nezikin.
  
Mishnah Four
And which is the positive precept concerning a menstruant for which they are liable?  
[This:] if one cohabited with a [ritually] pure woman, and she said to him:  “I have become impure”, and he withdrew immediately, he is liable, because his withdrawal is as pleasant to him as his entry. 

Explanation—Mishnah Four
This mishnah continues the subject taught in section two of the previous mishnah, namely cases where the court is or is not obligated to bring a sacrifice if they gave a mistaken ruling.  In Tractate Horayoth 2:4 we will learn that if the court made a mistake with regards to the laws of menstrual purity, in either a positive or negative commandment, they must bring the sacrifice.  Our mishnah asks what is the positive commandment to which that mishnah refers. 
The answer is a case where a man was having sexual relations with a pure woman, i.e. a woman who was not menstruating.  If, while having sex she told him that she had just begun to menstruate, he has a problem, since the Torah forbids sexual relations with a menstruant (Leviticus 20:18).  Our mishnah teaches that if the court instructed him to withdraw immediately, the court has taught mistakenly and must bring a sacrifice.  This is because his withdrawal while erect is actually pleasurable for him.  Rather he is forbidden to withdraw until his erection disappears.    
   
Mishnah Five
Rabbi Eliezer said:  “[Scripture says: ‘If any one touch. . . the carcass of] an impure creeping thing, and it be unknown to him’ (Leviticus 5:2), when the impure creeping thing is unknown to him, he is liable; but he is not liable, when the [fact that he is in the] Temple is unknown to him.”   
Rabbi Akiba said:  “[Scripture says:] ‘and it be hidden from him that he is impure’:   when his impurity is unknown to him, he is liable; but he is not liable, when the [fact that he is in the] Temple is unknown to him.”
Rabbi Ishmael said:  “[Scripture] twice [says:] ‘and it be hidden from him’, in order to make him liable both for the forgetfulness of the impurity and the forgetfulness of the Temple.”

Explanation—Mishnah Five
As we have explained throughout this chapter, in order to be obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice one must have known something and then forgotten it and then remembered it later on.  In both mishnah one and mishnah three of this chapter we assumed that what was known and forgotten was either the fact that he was impure or the fact that he was in the Temple or both.  This is the opinion of Rabbi Yishmael in section three.  His opinion is the dominant opinion in this chapter of mishnah.  
Rabbi Eliezer holds that what was known and then forgotten was specifically the source of the impurity, be it an impure creeping thing or other source of impurity mentioned in Leviticus 5:2 (carcasses of pure animals).  If he forgot that he was in the Temple he is not obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.  Likewise if never knew that he had been made impure by an impure creepy thing, but merely knew that he was impure, he is not obligated.  
Rabbi Akiva holds that what was forgotten was the fact of impurity but not the fact that he was in the Temple.  Unlike Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Akiva does not limit the knowledge and subsequent forgetfulness to the source of the impurity.  Even if he never knew what the source of the impurity was, but knew only that he was impure and then forgot, he will be obligated to bring a sliding scale sacrifice.  Rabbi Akiva disagrees with Rabbi Yishmael in that the latter holds that being aware and then forgetting that one was in the Temple also makes him obligated for bringing a sliding scale sacrifice, whereas Rabbi Akiva (and Rabbi Eliezer) believe that it does not.   
