Shevuoth, Chapter Five, Mishnayoth Four and Five

Introduction
The final two mishnayoth of chapter five teach that in order for one who makes a false oath of deposit to be liable to bring a sacrifice he must deny something to which if he had admitted he would have been liable.  Since he is not liable to pay a fine for a self-admission, he is not liable if he denies owing a fine.  He is liable only if he denies owing something which is considered financial compensation.

Mishnah Four
“You raped or seduced my daughter” and the other says, “I did not rape, nor seduce,” — “I adjure you,” — and he responds, “Amen!” he is liable. 
Rabbi Shimon exempts him, for he does not pay a fine on his own admission.   
They said to him:  “Even though he does not pay a fine on his own admission, he still pays for the shame and blemish [to the girl], based on his own admission.   

Explanation—Mishnah Four
According to the Exodus 22:15-16 and Deuteronomy 22:28-29, if a man rapes or seduces a virgin, he must pay her father a fine of 50 shekels.  The Rabbis added that besides the fine, he also has to pay other which penalties incumbent upon anyone who injures another person (see Bava Kamma, chapter eight).  He must pay for having embarrassed her, and he must pay for having injured her, thereby decreasing her value.  (We will learn the details of these laws in the third chapter of tractate Kethuboth.)
In the scenario in our mishnah a man approaches another man and accuses him of having raped or seduced his daughter and therefore owing him the 50 shekels, plus the other penalties.  The person responds that he didn’t do so, and then when the claimant adjures him, he affirms the adjuration.  According to the first opinion in the mishnah, when he admits that he did in fact rape or seduce the other man’s daughter, he will be liable for a sacrifice for his false oath.  Of course he will also be obligated to pay the fine and the other financial penalties.  
Rabbi Shimon disagrees.  Since there is a rule in Jewish law, that one who admits to a crime does not have to pay the fine for having done so, even if this person had admitted to having raped or seduced the daughter, he would not have been obligated to pay the fine.  Therefore, there was no denial of money, and the laws of the oath of deposit do not apply.
The Sages respond to Rabbi Shimon that although one who admits to a crime does not have to pay a fine, he does have to pay compensatory damages, which in this case include the payment for embarrassment and the payment for having decreased her value.  Since if he had admitted he would have had to pay, he did deny money, and is therefore liable for having sworn a false oath of deposit.

Mishnah Five
“You stole my ox,” and he says, “I have not stolen it” — “I adjure You,” — and he responds, “Amen!” he is liable. 
“I have stolen it, but I have not killed it or sold it”, — “I adjure you,” and he responds, “Amen!” he is exempt.   
“Your ox killed my ox,” and he says, “It did not kill [your ox]”, —  “I adjure you,” — and he responds, “Amen!” he is liable. 
“Your ox killed my slave,” and he says, “It did not kill [your slave]”, — “I adjure you,” — and he responds, “Amen!” he is exempt.   
He said to him, “You injured me, or bruised me,” and the other says, “I have not injured you or bruised you,” — “I adjure you,” and he responds, “Amen!” he is liable. 
His slave said to him, “You knocked out my tooth, or blinded my eye,” and he said, “I did not knock out [your tooth], or blind [your eye],’ — “I adjure you,” — and he responds, “Amen!” he is exempt.   
This is the principle: whenever he pays on his own admission,  he is liable; and when he does not pay on his own admission, he is exempt.

Explanation—Mishnah Five
The examples in the first six sections of this mishnah illustrate the rule that is stated at the end.  If a person denies a claim, to which if they had admitted they would have had to pay money to the claimant, they have caused the claimant to lose money and are liable to bring a sacrifice.  If the person denies a claim, to which even if they had admitted they would not have been liable to pay money to the claimant, they have not caused the claimant to lose money, and they are therefore not liable for a sacrifice.  The other relevant rule for our mishnah is the one mentioned in the previous mishnah, that one is not obligated to pay a fine based on his own admission, but he is obligated to make financial compensation based on his own admission.  The general difference between a fine and financial compensation is that a fine is a fixed amount whereas financial compensation is based on the actual damages.
Section one:  In this case a person denies having stolen the object.  If he had admitted to stealing he would have had to pay the value of the object to the owner, plus an additional one times the value of the object.  Paying back the value of the stolen object itself is considered financial compensation.  Since he would have been obligated to pay if he had admitted, he is liable for a sacrifice for having lied.
Section two:  If the thief slaughters or sells the stolen animal he is liable to pay four (for a sheep) or five (for an ox) times the value of the stolen animal.  In this case the person admitted to stealing the animal but denied having sold or slaughtered it.  This extra payment, beyond the value of the animal, is considered a fine.  Since he would not have been obligated to pay even if he had admitted, he is not liable for a sacrifice for having lied.
Section three:  When one’s ox kills another’s ox, the owner of the ox that killed must financially compensate the owner of the dead ox. Since he would have been obligated to pay if he had admitted, he is liable for a sacrifice for having lied.
Section four:  When one person’s ox kills another person’s slave, the owner of the ox must pay the owner of the slave 30 shekels.  This is a fixed amount and is therefore considered a fine. Since he would not have been obligated to pay even if he had admitted, he is not liable for a sacrifice for having lied.
Section five:  When one injures another person he is liable to make different types of financial compensation. Since he would have been obligated to pay if he had admitted, he is liable for a sacrifice for having lied.
Section six:  If a slave owner knocks out the tooth or puts out the eye of his slave he must set the slave free.  This is not a monetary claim but rather is considered to be a fine.  Since he would not have been obligated to set the slave free had he admitted to putting out his tooth or eye, he is not liable for a sacrifice for having lied.
