Shevuoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth Six and Seven

Introduction
Mishnayoth six and seven continue to discuss which sacrificial goat brought as a sin-offering brings atonement for which transgression.  Mishnah seven discusses differences between the atonement of Israelites and the atonement of priests. 

Mishnah Six
For intentional transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food, the goat offered inside [the Holy of Holies] on the Day of Atonement together with the Day of Atonement itself bring atonement.  
For other transgressions of the Torah, light and grave, intentional and unintentional, known and unknown, positive and negative, those punishable by kareth and those punishable by death imposed by the court — for all these the scapegoat [sent out on the Day of Atonement] brings atonement.

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  The previous several mishnayoth discussed for which sins the goats offered on new months, festivals and at the outer altar in the Temple on Yom Kippur bring atonement.  Our mishnah discusses yet a fourth goat, the goat sacrificed by the High Priest on Yom Kippur and whose blood is sprinkled inside the Holy of Holies.  This goat along with Yom Kippur itself atones for intentional transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food.  The previous mishnayoth discussed only unintentional sins.
Section two:  All of the other possible transgressions of the Torah’s laws, no matter how they are punished and no matter how serious they may be, whether done intentionally or unintentionally, are atoned for by the scapegoat, sent out to the wilderness, on Yom Kippur.  This teaching is learned from Leviticus 16:21-22:  “And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat and confess over it all the iniquities and transgressions of the Israelites, whatever their sins, putting them on the head of the goat; and it shall be sent off to the wilderness through a designated man.  Thus the goat shall carry on it all their iniquities to an inaccessible region.”
Our mishnah does not mention this, but there is one exception to this rule:  transgressions between one human being and another, for instance shaming another person in public.  The last mishnah in Tractate Yoma, which deals with Yom Kippur, states explicitly:  “For sins between a man and God Yom Kippur atones; for sins between a man and his fellow, Yom Kippur does not atone.”

Mishnah Seven
[The scapegoat] brings atonement to Israelites, priests, and the anointed high priest alike. 
What [then] is the difference between Israelites, priests, and the anointed high priest?
[None], save that the bullock [offered on the Day of Atonement] brings atonement to the priests for transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food.   
Rabbi Shimon says:  “Just as the blood of the goat that is offered within [the Holy of Holies] brings atonement for Israelites, so the blood of the bullock [offered on the Day of Atonement] brings atonement for priests; and just as the confession of sins pronounced over the scapegoat brings atonement for Israelites, so the confession pronounced over the bullock brings atonement for priests.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  The scapegoat mentioned in the previous mishnah atones for the transgression of all of the members of Israel, including the priests.  The one difference between priests and regular Israelites is that priests are atoned for transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food by the sacrificial bullock, brought on Yom Kippur.  This is learned from Leviticus 16:11, “Aaron shall then offer his bull of sin offering, to make expiation for himself and his household.”  “His household” refers to all of the priesthood.  However, except for this difference, there is not difference in the atonement process for priests and Israelites.
Section two:    Rabbi Shimon disagrees with the opinion in the previous mishnah.  H learns this by means of an analogy.  Israelites receive atonement for transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food by the sprinkling of the blood of the inner goat, without the confessional recited on the scapegoat.  So too do priests receive atonement for transgressions of the laws of impurity in connection with the temple and holy food by the means of the blood of the sacrificial bullock without the confessional mentioned Leviticus 16:11.  Therefore, we must ask, for what sin does the confessional bring atonement?    According to Rabbi Shimon the confessional over the bullock acts for priests the same way that the confessional over the scapegoat acts for Israelites.  Just as the confessional over the scapegoat brings atonement for all sins for Israelites, so too the confessional over the bullock brings atonement for all sins for priests.  This is the disagreement between Rabbi Shimon and the opinion in section one:  according to Rabbi Shimon priests receive atonement for most of their sins by the confession over the bullock, while according to the other Sages they receive atonement the same way other Israelites do, by the confession over the scapegoat.  
