Shevuoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnah three continues to discuss unpaid guardians who swear falsely with regards to the object under their watch.
Mishnah four is a digression in the Mishnah, which deals with some laws of stealing.   

Mishnah Three
[If the owner said,] “Where is my ox?” and he replied to him, “I do not know what you are talking about,” whereas in reality it died or was injured or captured or stolen or lost, [and the owner said,] “I adjure you,” and he said, “Amen”, he is exempt.  
[If the owner said,] “Where is my ox?” and he replied to him, “It was lost”; [and the owner said,] “I adjure you”, and he said, “Amen”, and witnesses testify against him that he had consumed it, he pays the principal; if he confessed himself, he pays the principal, a fifth, and brings a guilt-offering. 
[If the owner said,] “Where is my ox?” and he replied to him, “It was stolen;” [and the owner said,] “I adjure you, and he said, “Amen”, and witnesses testify against him that he himself stole it, he pays double; if he confessed himself, he pays the principal,   fifth, and brings a guilt-offering.

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  When the unpaid guardian is asked by the owner of the ox where is his ox, the he denies ever having received it.  When adjured, the he swears that he never received the ox.  If the ox in reality had died, been injured captured or lost, the unpaid guardian is exempt from bringing a sacrifice or from paying back the owner.  As we learned in the previous mishnah, since he could have told the truth and been exempt, when he lies he is still exempt.  
Section two:  In this case the unpaid guardian swears falsely that the animal had been lost.  In reality he had consumed the animal himself.  If he had told the truth he would have had to pay back to the owner the value of the animal.  If witnesses testify against him that he had consumed the animal himself, he must repay the value of the animal to the owner.  If he himself admits that he consumed the animal, without witnesses testifying against him, he must not only restore the value of the animal, but pay an additional fifth and bring a guilt offering.  This is the punishment prescribed in Leviticus 5:21-25.  Our mishnah teaches that a person makes this type of expiation for a false oath, only if he admits to having sworn falsely.  If witnesses prove him to have sworn falsely he does not bring a sacrifice or an additional fifth.   
Section three:  If the unpaid guardian claims that the ox was stolen but in reality he stole it, he is considered a thief.  If witnesses testify that he stole it he is obligated to pay back double the value of the ox, as are all thieves required to pay back double.  If he himself admits to having stolen the ox, he must pay back the value of the ox, and an additional fifth and bring a sacrifice, for having sworn a false oath.  He does not bring the double payment, due to the general rule that one who admits to having done a crime does not pay a fine.  Double payment is considered a fine.  

Mishnah Four
If a man said to one in the market, “Where is my ox which you have stolen?” and he replied, “I did not steal it,” and witnesses testified against him that he did steal it, he pays double.  
If he killed it or sold it, he pays four or five times its value.   
If he saw witnesses coming nearer and nearer, and he said, “I did steal it, but I did not kill or sell it,” he pays only the principal.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
This mishnah does not discuss false swearing but rather some laws of stealing.  
As we learned in Bava Kamma, one who steals and is caught must pay back a double payment. If he killed or sold a stolen animal he must pay back four (for a sheep or goat) or five (for an ox or cow) times the value.  We have also learned on several occasions, that one who admits to having stolen the object, without witnesses first testifying against him, only pays back the principal.  
The scenario in our mishnah, in which a person accuses someone (not a guardian, rather any person in the marketplace) of having stolen his ox teaches two new rulings.  First of all, if the accused admits to having stolen the object only because witnesses are about to testify against him, he is nevertheless obligated to pay back the principal but exempt from the double payment.  In other words, even though witnesses were about to testify against him, this still counts as an admission.  Second, if he admits to stealing the object, but does not admit to killing or selling it, he is exempt from paying back four or five times the value.  Although witnesses testify that he did indeed sell or slaughter the ox, since he admitted to stealing it, it is considered an admission and he must pay back only the principal.  There is no case in Jewish law where a person makes the four or five times payment, but is exempt for the double payment.  This is because the Torah states that he will pay back four or five times.  If he didn’t pay the double payment he would end up paying three or four times, an amount not specified anywhere in the Torah.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah three, section two:  What is the paradox in this section, a law that seems to be counterintuitive?  
Why is one who admits to a crime exempt from paying the fine?  What does this say about the penal system at the time of the Mishnah?
Mishnah four:  How would the ruling in this mishnah differ, if the accused was the unpaid guardian of the ox?    
