Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnayoth
Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten and Eleven

Introduction
The four mishnayoth which we will learn today all discuss cases in which the witnesses who swore false oaths of testimony are not legally liable for having done so.

Mishnah Seven
“I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that I am a priest, or, that I am a levite, or, that I am not the son of a divorced woman, or, that I am not the son of a halutzah;  
That so-and-so is a priest, or, that so-and-so is a levite, or, that he is not the son of a divorced woman, or, that he is not the son of a halutzah; 
That so-and-so violated his daughter, or seduced his daughter; 
That my son injured me;  
That my neighbor injured me, or set fire to my haystack on the Sabbath”:
[And they deny knowledge of testimony] they are exempt.

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
This mishnah is a contrast to mishnah six.  In it a person adjures witnesses to testify in non-monetary cases, or at least in cases in which the one adjuring does not stand to gain money by the testimony.
Section one and two:  In all of these cases the testimony is about the status of either the person who adjures the witnesses or about a third party.  There is no monetary suit.  The son of  priest and divorcee or a priest and a halutzah (one rejected by the levir) are considered disqualified priests and they do not retain their priestly status.    
Section three:   A person who rapes or seduces his own daughter is liable for the death penalty and not for a fine, as is one who rapes or seduces another person’s daughter.
Section four:  A child who strikes his parent and inflicts a wound is liable for the death penalty.  Since he will be executed he is exempt from paying a financial penalty, and therefore this case is not a monetary suit.
Section five:  One who injures another person on the Sabbath or burns a haystack is liable for the death penalty.  Although these cases also involve financial damage, since a person cannot be obligated for death and payment for the same act, the criminal would be liable for death and not payment.   This is not, therefore, a monetary suit.

Mishnah Eight
[If a man said,]  “I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that so-and-so promised to give me two hundred zuz, and did not give me”, they are exempt, for they are liable only for a money claim as [in the case of] deposit.   

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
The oath of testimony is discussed in Leviticus 5:1.  Leviticus 5:21 discusses an oath a person makes to deny having received a deposit, a loan, found a lost object or a stolen an object.  The similarity in the language between these two verses led the Rabbis to conclude that although not mentioned specifically in verse 5:1 it is similar to 5:21 as it also concerns things similar to deposit.  Therefore, in order for the witnesses to be liable for a false oath of testimony they must deny knowledge of a case that is similar to the case of a deposit, where one person claims he deposited money with another.  If the case is one of a monetary promise, such as our mishnah, the false oath does not make the witnesses liable.
 
Mishnah Nine
“I adjure you that, when you know any testimony for me, you should come and bear testimony for me,” they are exempt, because the oath preceded the testimony.  

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
This mishnah teaches that the testimony must precede the oath.  A person may not in advance adjure witnesses that if they, in the future know any testimony for him, that they must come and testify.  The order of the verbs in Leviticus 5:1 also points to the fact that the testimony must precede the oath.

Mishnah Ten
[If] he stood in the synagogue and said,  “I adjure you that if you know any testimony for me you should come and bear testimony for me”, they are exempt unless he directs himself to them.  

Explanation—Mishnah Ten
If the litigant stood in a public place and adjured a large, unspecified crowd of people that they should testify for him, and they all swore that they knew no testimony, the ones who did in fact know testimony are nevertheless exempt.  The mishnah teaches that the litigant must specify exactly who he is adjuring.  
When learning this mishnah we must remember that people who witness an event have a religious duty to testify, regardless of whether the litigant adjures them or not.  Our mishnah merely teaches that they have not sworn a false oath unless specifically adjured.

Mishnah Eleven
If he said to two [persons]: “I adjure you, so-and-so and so-and-so, that if you know any testimony for me you should come and bear testimony for me”:
[And they replied,]  “We swear we know no testimony for you”, and they did know testimony for him, [but it was evidence of] one witness from the mouth of another witness; or if one of them was a relative or [otherwise] ineligible [as a witness], they are exempt.

Explanation—Mishnah Eleven 
This mishnah teaches that if the witnesses who swore that they do not know testimony did know testimony but that the testimony would not have been accepted in the court, they are exempt for having sworn falsely.  The reasons that their testimony might not have been accepted are:  1)  the testimony was hearsay (see Sanhedrin 4:5); 2)  they were related to one of the litigants (see mishnah one of this chapter); 3)  they were otherwise unfit to testify (ibid.).  Since their testimony would not have been sufficient to render a verdict in any case, they are not liable for having sworn falsely.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah seven, sections one and two:  Why might you have thought that these cases were monetary suits?
