Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today discuss the fifth type of person who swears and collects:  the shopkeeper with his account book.

Mishnah Five
“And the shopkeeper with his account book,” — How so? 
Not that he [the shopkeeper] says to him [the customer], “It is written in my account book that you owe me two hundred zuz”.  
Rather he [the customer] says to him [the shopkeeper], “Give my son two seahs of wheat,” or, “Give my laborer small change to the value of a sela” and then he says, “I have given,” and they say, “We have not received”; he [the shopkeeper] takes an oath, and receives [his due from the customer].   
And they take an oath, and receive [their due].   
Ben Nanas said:  “How can both be permitted to come to a vain oath?  Rather he   takes without an oath, and they take without an oath.” 

Explanation—Mishnah Five
This mishnah explains the fifth category of person who swears and thereby collects:  the shopkeeper with his account book.  The mishnah first explains that this is not a case where a shopkeeper claims that it is written in his book that so-and-so owes him money.  In such a case the shopkeeper would not be able to swear and thereby collect from his customer.  In that case the customer would be able to deny the debt without even having to take an oath.
Rather the mishnah describes a case where a customer requested that a shopkeeper give his son 2 seah of wheat or his worker coins the value of two sela.  The customer promises to pay the shopkeeper back later on.  We can see from here that in the time of the Mishnah shopkeepers, who usually had cash and produce on hand, functioned somewhat like a bank.  Later on, the shopkeeper claims that he has paid the son or the workers.  The son or the workers respond that they have not been paid.  In other words, both sides are claiming that the customer/employer owes them money.  According to the first opinion in our mishnah the shopkeeper can swear and collect from the customer.  He is allowed to do so because he did not have any direct dealings with the son or the workers, direct dealings which would have implied that he trusts them to take an oath that they had not collected.  There is no true business relationship between the son or workers and the shopkeeper.  Rather there is a relationship only between the customer and the shopkeeper, and the customer and his son or workers.
The workers also may swear and thereby collect their wages from their employer.  Since they have no business relationship with the shopkeeper, they need not trust him to swear that he did pay them.  They may then swear and collect from their employer as all wage earners do (see mishnah one).
Ben Nanas points out a problem in this situation:  if the shopkeeper swears that he did give the wheat or money and the son or employees swear that they didn’t receive, one of them is definitely swearing falsely.  By the court mandating that both sides swear, the court is actually encouraging God’s name to be disgraced by a false oath.  Rather, Ben Nanas rules that both sides collect without taking an oath.  

Mishnah Six 
If he said to a shopkeeper, “Give me fruit for a denar,” and he gave him, and then the shopkeeper said to him, “Give me the denar”, and he replied to him, “I gave it to you, and you placed it in the till”, the customer takes an oath.   
If he gave him the denar, and said to him, “Give me the fruit,” and the shopkeeper says to him, “I have given it to you, and you took it to your house,” the shopkeeper takes an oath.   
Rabbi Judah says: “He who has the fruit in his possession, has the advantage.”   
If he said to a money-changer, “Give me change for a denar,” and he gave him; and said to him, “Give me the denar,” and the other said, “I have given it to you, and you placed it in the till,” the customer takes an oath. 
If he gave him the denar, and said to him, “Give me the small change,” and the other said to him, “I have given it to you, and you threw it in your purse,” the money -changer takes an oath. 
Rabbi Judah says:  “It is not usual for a money-changer to give [even] an issar until he receives the denar.”

Explanation—Mishnah Six
Section one:  Reuven asks Shimon the shopkeeper to sell him a denar’s worth of fruit, and Shimon gives him the fruit.  When Shimon claims the denar from Reuven, Reuven responds that he has already paid him, and that Shimon put it in into the till.  The mishnah rules that Reuven may swear that he gave Shimon the denar and be exempt from paying.  Since Shimon cannot prove that he did not receive the denar, he cannot recover the alleged debt. 
In the second scenario in this section, Reuven gives the denar before getting the fruit.  When Reuven claims the fruit, Shimon responds that he has already paid him and that Reuven put the fruit into his house.  In this case Shimon is allowed to swear that he has already paid, for the same reason that Reuven was allowed to swear in the first case. 
Rabbi Judah says that whoever holds the fruit has the advantage.  According to Rashi, Rabbi Judah disagrees with the ruling in section one.  Since the customer already has possession of the fruit he is believed when he says that he gave the denar without taking an oath.  Even though it is not unusual for shopkeepers to give their produce on credit, Rabbi Judah still believes the customer who claims to have paid since he has possession of the goods. 
Section two:  This section is basically the same as the previous one, accept that it discusses a money-changer and not a shopkeeper.  Rabbi Judah’s opinion differs slightly, at least in the way he phrases it.  Rabbi Judah again disagrees with the first part of the section (according to Rashi).  When the customer has already received the change and the money-changer claims that he has not received the denar, the customer is believed to have given the denar even without taking an oath.  Since money-changers generally do not give coins without having received other coins, we can assume that the other person did indeed give the coin.    

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah Five:  Why does this mishnah begin by stating an incorrect example of a “shopkeeper with his account book”?  [Note, that this is the only case in our chapter where the mishnah lists the incorrect explanation.]
Mishnah six:  How are the two scenarios in the two halves of this mishnah different?    
