Shevuoth, Chapter Four, Mishnayoth, Three and Four

Introduction
The first half of mishnah three explains how an oath of testimony is done.  The second half of the mishnah discusses a witness who falsely swears five times that he had no knowledge of testimony.
Mishnah four discusses how many of the witnesses deny knowledge such that they become liable for swearing a false oath of testimony.  

Mishnah Three
The oath of testimony:  How is it done? 
If he said to two [persons]:  “Come and bear testimony for me”; [and they replied:]  “We swear we know no testimony for you”; 
Or they said to him:  “We know no testimony for you”, [and he said:]  “I adjure you” and they said,  “Amen! “, they are liable.   
If he adjured them five times outside the court, and the they came to the court and admitted [knowledge of testimony], they are exempt.  
If they denied, they are liable for each [oath].   
If he adjured them five times before the court, and they denied [knowledge of testimony], they are liable only once. 
Said Rabbi Shimon: “What is the reason?   Because they cannot afterwards admit [knowledge].   

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Section one:  An oath of testimony can be done in one of two ways.  The first way is for the litigant to ask the witnesses to come and testify on his behalf and for them to swear that they have no knowledge of testimony.  Alternatively the witnesses can state that they know no testimony and the litigant can adjure them that they know no testimony.  If they answer amen, they have sworn an oath of testimony.  If they have sworn falsely they are liable.
Section two:  This section discusses a case where a litigant adjured the witnesses five times.  The mishnah asks the question, in what case will they be liable for having sworn falsely five times, in what case they will be liable for having sworn falsely once and in what case will they be exempt.  
If, he adjured them outside of the court, and then when they came to court they admitted that they knew testimony, they are not liable.  As we learned in mishnah one, the denial of knowledge must occur in front of the court.  
If, after having adjured them five times they come to court and continue to deny knowledge, then they are liable for having sworn five false oaths of testimony.  The denial at court makes each oath outside of court a potentially effective oath, and therefore if it was false, it causes them to be liable.
If he adjured them five times in front of the court and they denied knowledge each time, they will be liable for having sworn only one false oath.  Rabbi Shimon explains that since after the first denial in front of the court they will not be able to change their minds, the subsequent oaths were meaningless.  Once a person has in court denied knowing testimony he cannot change his mind and testify.  Since, except for the first oath, the other oaths were meaningless, he can only be liable for one false oath.

Mishnah Four
If both [persons] denied [knowledge] together, they are both liable. 
If one after another, the first is liable, and the second exempt.   
If one denied, and the other admitted, the one who denied is liable. 
If there were two sets of witnesses, and the first denied, and then the second denied, they are both liable, because the testimony could be upheld by [either of] the two.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
In order to understand this mishnah it is important to remember that in Jewish law two witnesses are needed to prove a case.  A single witness’s testimony is not acceptable in court.
Section one: If both witnesses deny knowledge at the same time then they are both liable for false oaths.  Since they both equally have caused the litigant to lose his case, they are both liable. 
Section two:  If one denies knowing testimony and then the second witness also denies, the first witness is liable and the second is not.  Since, when the second witness was asked to testify, the only other witness had already sworn that he had no knowledge, the second person’s testimony would not have been accepted in any case.  In other words, by denying knowledge he did not cause any loss to the litigant, and he is therefore not liable.
Section three:  If one person denies knowledge and the other person admits to knowing testimony, the first person is liable since he caused the litigant to lose his case.  If he had admitted, there would have been the sufficient two to prove the case.
Section four:  If two sets of two witnesses deny knowledge, one after the other, both sets, meaning all four witnesses, are liable.  Since the testimony could have been established by either set of witnesses, they have all caused a loss to the litigant by denying knowledge, and they are therefore, all liable.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four:  What is the difference between the scenario in section two and the scenario in section four?
