Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Three and Four

Introduction 
The two mishnayoth which we will learn today continue to discuss cases where a person swears and thereby collects, as opposed to the usual case where a person swears and is exempt from paying.  

Mishnah Three
“He who has been wounded,” — How so? 
If they testified about a person that another went onto his property whole, and came out wounded, and he said to him, “You have wounded me,” and the other said, “I have not wounded you,” he takes an oath, and receives [damages]. 
R. Judah says: “[There is no oath] unless there is partial admission:   How so?  He said to him, you have inflicted on me two wounds,” and the other said, “I inflicted on you only one wound.” 

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah discusses the third example of one who swears and thereby collects:  a person who has been wounded.  In this scenario witnesses testify that Shimon entered Reuven’s property without having been previously injured and that he came out wounded.  Shimon claims that Reuven injured him and Reuven denies having done so.  Since it is highly likely that Shimon is telling the truth and that Reuven did indeed injure Shimon, Shimon may take an oath and collect damages.
Rabbi Judah states that Shimon may collect only if Reuven admits to part of the claim.  For instance if Shimon claims that Reuven injured him twice and Reuven admits to having done so only once, then Shimon may swear and collect.  This opinion of Rabbi Judah is consistent with his opinion in the two previous mishnayoth.

Mishnah Four
“He whose opponent is suspected of taking a false oath,” — How so? 
Whether it be the oath of testimony, or the oath of deposit, or even a vain oath. 
If one [of the litigants] was a dice-player, or usurer, or pigeon-flyer, or dealer in the produce of the seventh year, his opponent takes the oath and collects [his claim].  
If both are suspect, the oath returns to its place, these are the words of Rabbi Yose.    
Rabbi Meir says:  “They divide [the claim].”

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  The fourth category of person who swears and thereby collects is one whose opponent is suspected of taking false oaths.  The mishnah explains that this is true no matter what type of false oath he took, even a vain oath. 
Section two:  The mishnah now expands the list of those who are suspected of taking false oaths.  This category includes all those who are forbidden from testifying (see Sanhedrin 3:3).  Since these people are gamblers or otherwise do not respect the normal societal rules for money, they are not trusted when another claims a debt from them.  
Section three:  If both sides are not trustworthy, Rabbi Yose says that the normal rules return to their place.  This means that the defendant, the one who had a claim made against him, takes an oath and is thereby exempt from paying money.  Rabbi Meir disagrees.  If both are suspected of taking false oaths, the court cannot allow either of them to swear.  This would be in essence encouraging people to take false oaths. Rather they split the claim, meaning that the defendant will have to pay half the claim.  

Questions for Further Thought: 
Mishnah three:  What would be the law if there were no witnesses who testified that Shimon went onto Reuven’s property?  Would Shimon still be able to collect?
Mishnah four:  Why does the mishnah say “even a vain oath”?  Why might you have thought that if he took a vain oath he would still be trustworthy with regards to other oaths?  Why is he not trustworthy with other oaths after having taken a vain oath?
Mishnah four:  Why doesn’t Rabbi Judah disagree on this mishnah, as he has on the three previous mishnayoth in our chapter?  
