Shevuoth, Chapter Six, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
In the previous three chapters the mishnah discussed oaths which a person takes on his own.  Our chapter begins to discuss oaths which are imposed by a court.  There are several different types of oaths that may be imposed by a court.  The first type of oath, the one described in our chapter, is sworn in a case where a person admits to owing part of a claim but denies the other part of the claim.  We will learn the particulars of this oath as we proceed.  For the sake of clarity, when explaining these mishnayoth we will use the name Reuven as the claimant, and Shimon as the defendant.

Mishnah One
The oath of the judges [is imposed when] the claim is [at least] two silver coins, and the admission the equivalent of a perutah.   
And if the admission is not of the same kind as the claim, he is exempt.   
How is this so? 
“Two silver ma’ahs of mine are in your possession,” [and the other replies], “I have nothing of yours in my possession except a perutah,”  he is exempt. 
“Two silver ma’ahs of mine and a perutah are in your possession,” [and the other replies,] “I have nothing of yours in my possession except a perutah,” he is liable. 
“A hundred denarii of mine are in your possession”, [and the other replies], “I have nothing of yours,” he is exempt.   
“A hundred denarii of mine are in your possession”, [and the other replies],  “I have of yours only fifty denarii,” he is liable. 
“You have of my father’s a hundred denarii”, [and the other replies], “I have of his only fifty denarii”, he is exempt, because it is as if he restores a lost object.   

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  This section introduces two general rules for the “oath of judges” described in our mishnah.  The case is where Reuven tells Shimon that he owes him money and Shimon denies owing the full amount.  Our mishnah teaches that if Shimon denies owing Reuven at least 2 ma’ah (a small, silver coin) and admits to owing at least a perutah (a small, not valuable, copper coin) he will be obligated to swear an oath that he does not owe the rest.  Furthermore, he only has to swear an oath if that which he admits owing is the same kind as that which he denies. For instance if Reuven claims that Shimon owes him 50 barrels of oil and Shimon responds that he owes 50 barrels of wine, Shimon need not swear.  The mishnah will explicate this ruling in mishnah three.  
Section two:  The remainder of the mishnah explains the first rule, that the denial must be of two ma’ahs and the admission one perutah.  If Reuven claims two ma’ahs and Shimon admits to one perutah, Shimon is not obligated for he denied only two ma’ahs less a perutah, which is less than the minimum two ma’ahs required.  He will be obligated to swear if Reuven claims two ma’ahs and a perutah and Shimon admits to owing a perutah, for in this case Shimon did deny a full two ma’ahs.
Section three:  If Shimon completely denies owing Reuven money he is exempt from taking an oath.  If, however, he admits to part of the claim, he must take an oath.  This law requires some explanation for it may seem counterintuitive.  The reasoning is thus:  people are generally not so brazen as to completely deny something that is true.  If Reuven claims money from Shimon and Shimon really does owe money he will not be so brash as to deny the debt completely.  Therefore if he does deny the debt, he is believed without having to take an oath.  People are however brazen enough to deny parts of debts.  Shimon may reason to himself that he will deny owing Reuven part of the debt now and then when he gets the chance he will repay the whole debt.   Since we assume that people might lie in such occasions, he must take an oath so that we can more safely assume that he is telling the truth.   
Section four:  If Reuven claims that Shimon’s father owes him money and Shimon admits to part of the claim, he need not take an oath on the rest.  Since this was not a claim against Shimon but against Shimon’s father, Shimon could have been brazen enough to deny the entire claim.  Since he admitted to part of it, we trust him without making him take an oath.
 
Mishnah Two
“You have of mine a hundred denarii”, he said to him, “Yes.” 
The next day he said to him, “Give them to me”, [and he replied,] “I have given them to you,” he is exempt. 
[If he says,] “Nothing of yours is in my possession,” he is liable.   
“You have of mine a hundred denarii”, he said to him, “Yes”. [And then he said], “Do not give them to me except before witnesses.” 
The next day he said to him, “Give them to me;” [and he replied,] “I have given them to you,” he is liable, because he should have given them to him before witnesses.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Section one:  In the first scenario, Shimon admits one day to owing Reuven a hundred denarii (a coin).  When the next day Reuven claims them, Shimon counterclaims that he has already paid him back.  In such a case Shimon is exempt since Reuven cannot prove that Shimon did not pay him back.  If, however, Shimon changes his claim from the previous day, and now denies owing Reuven money, he is liable to pay.  After having admitted to owing money on one day, he may not change his mind the next.
Section two:  If, when Shimon admits to owing money, Reuven tells him that he wants the money returned only in front of witnesses, and then the next day Shimon claims that he paid back the money, Shimon is not believed.  Since Reuven specified that he wanted the money returned in front of witnesses, the burden is now on Shimon to prove that he did pay him back. Without witnesses he will not be able to do so.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah one, section four:  Why is this compared to returning a lost object?  
