Introduction to Tractate Shevuoth

Our tractate deals mostly with oaths (shevuoth).  There are four different kinds of oaths mentioned in the Torah:
An oath whereby a person promises to do either a positive action (to eat) or a negative action (to not eat) (Leviticus 5:4).
A false oath (Exodus 20:7).
A testimonial oath, which is not mentioned directly in the Torah but is exegetically derived from Leviticus 5:1.
An oath which a guardian takes with regards to something deposited in his hands (Leviticus 5:21-22).
Tractate Shevuoth contains laws regarding all of these types of oaths.
The first two chapters of Shevuoth contain laws concerning a person who contracted ritual impurity (either through contact with the dead or another form of impurity) without realizing it and then later realizes that he had done so.  If, while impure, he had either entered the Temple or eaten holy food, he will need to bring a sacrifice to atone for his sin.  The reason that tractate Shevuoth discusses this topic is that it is discussed in the Torah in Leviticus 5:2-3, a verse before the Torah mentions the first type of oath (see above).  

Shevuoth, Chapter One, Mishnayoth One, Two and Three

Introduction
Mishnah one is an introductory mishnah to the entire tractate.  Besides mentioning oaths it mentions knowledge of impurity, a topic to be discussed throughout the remainder of the chapter.  Mishnayoth two and three begin to define when a person is obligated to bring a sacrifice in a situation where he did not know that he had been impure.

Mishnah One
Oaths are of two kinds, subdivided into four;  
The laws concerning the discovery of having contracted uncleanness are of two kinds, subdivided into four;  
The laws concerning carrying on the Sabbath are of two kinds, subdivided into four.
The symptoms of negas are of two kinds, subdivided into four.

Explanation—Mishnah One
Section one:  There are two kinds of oaths of “expression” (category one above, in introduction) which are explicit in the Torah:  1)  A person swears to do something such as eating;  2)  A person swears to refrain from doing something.  If a person takes such an oath and then breaks it, he will be obligated to bring a sacrifice to atone for his sin (see Leviticus 5:4-13).  The types of oaths specifically referred to in the Torah are oaths regarding the future, that a person will or will not do something.  The Sages added two more types of oaths:  those taken with regards to the past:  1)  A person swears that he did do something; 2)  A person swears that he did not do something.  This is what the mishnah means when it says that there are two types of oaths which are four.  
Section two:  There are two types of sins mentioned in the Torah with regards to one who becomes impure without realizing it.  The first is one who is impure and then eats holy food, such as sacrifices or terumah (heave offering).  The second is one who is impure and then enters the Temple.  One who had intentionally committed one of these acts would be obligated for kareth (excommunication).  Our mishnah teaches that one who unintentionally does one of these acts, and later realizes what he has done, is obligated to bring a sacrifice.  The Sages added two other types of sins of this nature.  1)  A person knew that he was impure but did not know that what he was eating was holy food; 2)  A person knew that he was impure but entered the Temple without realizing that he was doing so.  In both of these cases the person is again obligated for a sacrifice.
Section three:  On the Sabbath it is forbidden to carry an object from the private domain to the public domain.  The two primary categories of this prohibition are:  1)  A person stands in the public domain and puts his hand into the private domain and brings something out; 2)  A person stands in the private domain and puts something out into the public domain.  The Sages taught that there are another two categories of forbidden carrying:  1)  A person stands in the private domain and puts his hand out into the public domain and brings something in; 2)  A person stands in the public domain and puts something from there into the private domain.  These laws are discussed at greater length in Tractate Shabbath.  They are only mentioned here due to the similarity in language with the first two sections.
Section four:  A nega is a skin disorder, discussed at length in Leviticus 13.  It is often referred to as leprosy but in truth we do not know precisely what disease is referred to in the Torah.  Our mishnah teaches that there are two types of negas mentioned specifically in the Torah:  1)  A swelling; 2)  A discoloration.  The Sages added two more types of negas, both of which are learned from the word “rash” mentioned in the verse.  These laws are discussed at greater length in Tractate Negaim.

Mishnah Two
Where there is knowledge at the beginning and at the end but forgetfulness between,  a “sliding scales” sacrifice is brought.  
Where there is knowledge at the beginning but not at the end, the goat which is [sacrificed and its blood sprinkled] within [the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement]  together with the Day of Atonement itself hold the sin in suspense until it become known to the sinner, and he brings the “sliding scale” sacrifice.

Explanation—Mishnah Two
Our mishnah begins to discuss the laws concerning the discovery of the contracting of uncleanness mentioned in section two of the previous mishnah.  
Section one:  In order for one to become obligated to bring a sacrifice for this type of sin, one must have known that he had become impure, and then forgot, and then ate of a holy thing or entered the Temple, and then afterwards remembered that he was impure.  In other words there must be knowledge of the impurity in the beginning of the process and knowledge at the end, as well as forgetfulness in between at the time when he either at holy food or entered the Temple.
Section two:  If after having eaten the holy food or entered the Temple one never afterwards rembembered that one was impure at the time, obviously one will not even realize the need to bring a sacrifice to atone for the sin.  Therefore our mishnah teaches that the sin is suspended, meaning punishment for the sin is suspended, through the sacrifice of the goat on Yom Kippur (the Day of Atonement) and through Yom Kippur itself. Once he does remember what he has done, although Yom Kippur and the sacrificial goat have meanwhile suspended the punishment for the sin, he must bring a sacrifice in order to achieve full atonement.

Mishnah Three
Where there is no knowledge at the beginning but there is knowledge at the end, the goat sacrificed on the outer altar together with the day of atonement bring atonement, for it says: “[one he-goat for a sin-offering] beside the sin-offering of atonement” (Numbers 29:11):  for that which this goat [prepared inside the Holy of Holies] atones this goat [prepared outside] atones: just as the ‘inner’ goat atones only for a sin — where there was knowledge [at the beginning], so the “outer” goat atones only for a sin — where there was knowledge [at the end].

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Our mishnah deals with the situation where a person did not know that they had become impure and then ate of holy food or entered the Temple and then realized that they were impure.  Since there is not knowledge in the beginning and in the end, this person cannot achieve atonement by personally bringing a “sliding scale” sacrifice.  Rather our mishnah teaches that the goat sacrificed on Yom Kippur at the outer altar as a sin-offering brings atonement from this person.  This teaching is learned by a comparison with the goat offered inside the Holy of Holies.  Just as the goat offered inside brings atonement in a case where there was knowledge of the contraction of uncleanness, in this case prior to the eating of the holy food or the entering into the Temple (see mishnah two) so too the goat offered outside brings atonement in a case where there was knowledge of the contraction of uncleanness, in this case after the eating of the holy food or the entering into the Temple.      

