Shevuoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Eight and Nine

Introduction
Mishnah eight defines a vain oath.  Mishnah nine discusses one who takes two oaths, the second oath being the exact opposite of the first oath.

Mishnah Eight
What is a vain oath? 
If he swore that which is contrary to the facts known to people, saying of a pillar of stone that it is of gold; or of a man that he is a woman; or of a woman that she is a man. 
If he swore concerning a thing which is impossible, [for instance if he said,] “If I have not seen a camel flying in the air”,  or “If I have not seen a serpent as thick as the beam of the olive press”. 
If he said to witnesses, “Come and bear testimony for me”, [and they replied,] “We swear that we will not bear testimony for you”.
If he swore to annul a commandment, [for example] not to make a sukkah,  or not to take a lulav,  or not to put on tefillin.  
These are vain oaths, for which one is liable, for intentional transgression, lashes, and for unintentional transgression one is exempt. 

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
At the end of the previous mishnah we were introduced to the concept of a vain oath, which is forbidden in Exodus 20:7, one of the verses of the Ten Commandments.  The punishment for intentionally swearing in vain is lashes and for unintentional swearing in vain there is no punishment.  Our mishnah lists four different types of vain oaths.
Section one: If one swears about something that is obviously false, for instance if he looks at a pillar of stone and swears that it is gold, then he has taken God’s name in vain by swearing in vain.  
Section two: Similarly, if he swears by something that cannot happen, for instance he swears that he saw a camel fly in the air, he has also sworn in vain.
Section three:  According to Leviticus 5:1, if a person has been witness to an event he is obligated to testify.  If a person asks another person to testify and he has testimony to give, and he swears that the he will not testify, then he has sworn in vain.  This example actually can fit into the example in the next section, one who swears not to observe one of the commandments.  Since testifying is a positive commandment one who swears not to do so has sworn in vain.
Section four:  One who swears not to observe one of the commandments has sworn in vain.  

Mishnah Nine
[If one said:] “I swear I shall eat this loaf”; [and then he said,] “I swear I shall not eat it,” the first is an oath of utterance,  and the second is a vain oath.   
If he ate it, he transgressed the vain oath; if he did not eat it, he transgressed the oath of utterance.

Explanation—Mishnah Nine
In the case in our mishnah a person swears two oaths, the second oath contradicting the first.  The first oath is considered to be a normal oath of utterance, which he must observe or be liable for breaking his oath.  The second oath is considered a vain oath, since it is forbidden to observe the oath.  In other words, similar to one who swears not to observe a commandment, this person has sworn to do that which is forbidden for him to do.
If he eats the loaf, as he swore to do in the first oath, he is liable for having broken the second oath.  If he does not eat it, he is liable for having broken his oath of utterance.  In the Talmud it is explained that if he does not eat the loaf he has transgressed not only his oath of utterance but he has also made a vain oath, despite the fact that he kept the oath.  Since at the time that he made the oath it was forbidden to keep, he is liable for having made a vain oath even if he does keep it.

Questions for Further Thought: 
Mishnah eight:  Why does the mishnah consider all of these oaths to be in vain?  
What is the difference between a false oath and a vain oath?
