Shevuoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnayoth One and Two

Introduction
The first mishnah in this chapter was taught in its entirety in Bava Metziah 7:8.  It is repeated here as an opening to the rest of the chapter which discusses when a guardian is liable to bring a sacrifice for having sworn a false oath.  There are certain types of guardians who under circumstances if not able to return the object under their guard may take an oath and thereby exempt themselves from having to pay back the owner.  Our chapter will teach that they are liable to bring a sacrifice only if they take an oath that exempted them from paying back the owner.  The type of oath described here is an “oath of deposit”, discussed above in chapter five.  The punishment for intentionally swearing a false oath of deposit is a guilt offering.  

Mishnah One
There are four kinds of guardians:  an unpaid guardian, a borrower, a paid guardian and a hirer.  
An unpaid guardian may take an oath [that he had not been neglectful] in every case [of loss or damage and be free of liability].  
A borrower must make restitution in every case.
A paid guardian or a hirer may take an oath if the beast was injured, or taken captive or dead, but he must make restitution if it was lost or stolen.

Explanation—Mishnah One
This mishnah lists the four types of guardians in Jewish law.  The general principle is that the more benefit a guardian receives and the less benefit he gives to the owner of the object, the more liable he will be if the object is not returnable.  Therefore a borrower, who does not pay and gets full use of the object pays in any case that the object is not returnable.  On the other hand, an unpaid guardian only gives benefit to the owner and receives no benefit in return.  Therefore in all cases in which something occurs to the object that he is guarding he may take an oath that he was not neglectful and be exempt from liability.  Paid guardians and hirers are in-between cases.  The hirer gets use of the object but he pays for such use.  The paid guardian is not allowed to use the object but he gets paid for watching it.  Therefore both of these guardians are sometimes allowed to take an oath and thereby be exempt from liability and sometimes they are liable to pay the owner. If the animal was lost or stolen and is no longer in front of us, they must pay the owner the value of the animal.  If, however, it died a natural death, was taken captive or injured then they may take an oath and exempt themselves from liability.

Mishnah Two
If he [the owner] said to the unpaid guardian, “Where is my ox?” and he replied to him, 
“It died,” whereas in reality it was injured or captured or stolen or lost; 
[Or he replied], “It was injured,” whereas in reality it died or was captured or stolen or lost; 
[Or he replied,] “It was captured,” whereas in reality it died or was injured or stolen or lost; 
[Or he replied,] “It was stolen,” whereas in reality it died or was injured or captured or lost; 
[Or he replied,] “It was lost,” whereas in reality it died or was injured or captured or stolen; 
[And the owner said,] “I adjure you,” and he said, “amen”, he is exempt [from having to bring a sacrifice for a false oath].

Explanation—Mishnah Two
As we learned in the previous mishnah, an unpaid guardian can always take an oath and exempt himself from repaying the owner if he cannot return the object under guard.  It doesn’t matter whether the animal died, was injured, taken captive, stolen or lost; in all of these cases the unpaid guardian may swear that he was not negligent and be exempt from having to pay back the owner.
In the five different scenarios in our mishnah the unpaid guardian lies with regards to what happened to the animal.  However, even if he had told the truth, he would not have been liable to pay back the owner.  For instance, if he says that the animal died, but in truth it had been lost, he has lied, but he could have told the truth without having to pay back the owner.  In all of these cases, even if the unpaid guardian swears to his lie, he is not liable to bring a sacrifice.  Since his false oath was unnecessary it does not obligate him for the same consequences as an oath that did actually exempt him from paying back the value of the animal under his watch.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah two:  Why does the mishnah have to list all of these possibilities?  What might a reader have thought had some of the possibilities not been listed?  

