Shevuoth, Chapter Seven, Mishnayoth Seven and Eight

Introduction
Mishnah seven teaches two more categories of people who swear and thereby collect.  Mishnah eight teaches five types of defendants who must take oaths even though the claimant’s claim is not certain.  

Mishnah Seven
So too they have said that she who impairs her kethubah [by admitting that it had already been partially paid] cannot receive [the remainder of the] payment except on oath;   
And that if one witness testifies against her that it [the kethubah] has been paid [in full], she cannot receive payment except on oath; 
And that from assigned property or orphans’ property she cannot exact payment [for her kethubah] except on oath; 
And that if she claims [her kethubah] not in his presence, she cannot receive payment except on oath.
So, too, orphans cannot receive payment except on oath [namely]: “We swear that our father did not enjoin in his will, neither did our father say unto us, nor did we find [written] among the documents of our father that this document is paid.”   
Rabbi Yochanan ben Beroka says:  “Even if the son was born after his father’s death he may take an oath, and collect his claim.” 
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said:  “If there are witnesses that the father said at the time of his death that this document was not paid, he receives [his claim] without an oath.”

Explanation—Mishnah Seven
Section one:  The previous six mishnayoth listed five cases where a person could swear and collect from others.  Our mishnah lists two other such cases.  There is however a difference between the cases listed here and those listed above.  In those above, the innovation of the mishnah was that the person might take an oath and thereby collect.  Without the mishnah we would have thought that the person could not have collected at all, since they could not prove their claim.  In the cases in our mishnah, the mishnah is teaching that they must swear before they collect.  Without the mishnah we would have thought that they could have collected without an oath, for as we shall see, these people can indeed prove their claims.
The first section discusses women collecting their “kethubah” or marriage document, which has written in it an amount of money paid to the woman upon death or divorce.  In normal circumstances the woman could collect without taking an oath, since she holds the actual document.  However, there are several circumstances where in order to collect, she must take an oath:  1)  a woman who has already received part of the kethubah money; 2)  if one person testifies that she has already received her kethubah (two witnesses are needed for the husband to prove that she has already collected); 3)  if she collects from property that the husband had already given to others (the kethubah creates a lien on all of the husband’s property) or from the husband’s children; 4) if she collects while not in front of him.  In all of these cases, the woman must swear that she has not received her kethubah before she can collect from the husband or from his estate.
Section two:  Similarly, if orphans find amongst their fathers documents a bill that says that others owe him money they must swear that their father did not tell them, either verbally, in a will or in a separate document, that the bill had already collected.  If they take this oath they may then collect the debt.
According to Rabbi Yochanan ben Baroka, even if the son was born after the father’s death, and therefore cannot swear that his father did not tell him that the bill had already been paid, he may still swear that he did not find amongst his father’s other documents a note stating that the debt had already been paid.  After taking this oath the son may collect the debt.  
According to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel if there are witnesses who say that at the time of death the father said to them that the bill was not paid, the father’s heirs may collect the debt without taking an oath.

Mishnah Eight
And these take an oath though there is no [definite] claim:  partners, tenants, guardians, the wife who transacts the affairs in the house, and the son of the house. 
[If] he said to him, “What do you claim of me?”, [and the other replied,] “I want you to swear to me”, he must take an oath. 
If the partners or tenants had divided, he cannot impose an oath upon them.   
If an oath was imposed upon him in another case, they impose upon him the whole.   
And the seventh year cancels the oath.  

Explanation—Mishnah Eight
Section one:  Generally, a person has to swear that he doesn’t owe the claimant, only if the claimant had professed to be certain that he was owed money.  If the claimant is not himself certain, the defendant need not swear.  Our mishnah lists several exceptions to this rule.  
1.  If one partner suspects another partner of not equally sharing the business costs or profits, he may impose upon him an oath.
If a landowner suspects that a sharecropper did not honestly report the amount of crops harvested, he may impose upon him an oath.
If a person suspects that someone who had been appointed as a guardian over his property, had withheld some of the property for himself, he may impose upon him an oath.
If a husband leaves his household and finances in the care of his wife, he may make her take an oath that she did not take any of his property.
Similarly, if one brother administers an inheritance, the other brothers impose upon him an oath that he did not take any of the property for himself.  
Section two:  In all of these circumstances the claimant may request that the defendant swear that he didn’t take any of the property, without the claimant having to express a definite claim.
Section three:  Once partners have already split up their partnership, one partner may not force another partner to swear that he didn’t take a part that didn’t belong to him while the partnership still existed.  
Section four:  If a person already must take an oath to another person that he does not owe him something, the claimant may make him swear another oath, that under normal circumstances he would not have the power to impose.  
Section five:  The Sabbatical year cancels all debts.  If Reuven claimed that Shimon owed him money, and Shimon admitted to owing part of the money and denied owing the rest, and then the Sabbatical year arrived, Shimon does not need to swear that he doesn’t owe the rest.  Since the Sabbatical year cancels the debt, it also erases the need to swear with regards to the debt.  

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah eight:  Why does the mishnah rule that in these circumstances a person make another person take an oath without having a definite claim?  Why under normal circumstances must there be a definite claim for an oath to be imposed?

