Shevuoth, Chapter Five, Mishnayoth Five and Six

Introduction
Mishnah five discusses combining several oaths into one oath or separating one oath into several oaths.  Mishnah six defines a false oath of testimony as denying testimony that would have aided the litigant in a monetary suit.

Mishnah Five
“I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that there are of mine in the possession of so-and-so a deposit, a loan, a stolen object, and a lost object”;
[And they respond]:  “We swear we know no testimony for you”, they are liable only once.  
“We swear we know not that there are of yours in the possession of so-and-so a deposit, a loan, a stolen object, and a lost object”, they are liable for each one.  
“I adjure you that you bear testimony for me that there is of mine in the possession of so-and-so a deposit of wheat, barley, and spelt”;
[And they respond]:  “We swear we know no testimony for you”, they are liable only once.  
“We swear we know no testimony for you that there is of yours in the possession of so-and-so a deposit of wheat, barley, and spelt”, they are liable for each one. 

Explanation—Mishnah Five
Section one:  In the scenario in this section a person adjures witnesses to testify that another person has in his possession a deposit, a loan, a stolen object and a lost object that belong to him (the first person).  If the witnesses swear falsely that they know no testimony, they are only obligated for having sworn one false oath of testimony.  Since they made only one oath they can be obligated only once.  
If however, they swear four different oaths, by separately mentioning the deposit, loan, stolen object and lost object, then they are obligated for four false oaths.  Since they separated their response into four details they have sworn four oaths and they are obligated for each one.
Section two:  The scenario in this section is similar to the scenario in the previous section.  The only difference is that here at issue are three different kinds of grain.  Again, if the witnesses combine their denial into one oath, then they are obligated only once.  If they separate the oath into three different details they will be obligated for each detail. 

Mishnah Six
“I adjure you that you come and bear testimony for me that so-and-so owes me full damages, or half damages, or double payment, or four or five payment;  
Or that so-and-so raped my daughter, or seduced my daughter; 
Or that my son struck me;   
Or that my neighbor injured me, or set fire to my haystack on the Day of Atonement”;   
[And they deny knowledge of testimony] they are liable.  

Explanation—Mishnah Six
All of the cases mentioned in our mishnah are cases where a person is adjuring witnesses to testify for him in a monetary suit.  In mishnah seven we will learn examples of testimony in non-monetary suits.  Together these two mishnayoth teach that if a person swears a false oath of testimony in a monetary suit he is liable, but if he swears a false oath of testimony in a non-monetary suit he is not liable.  
Section one:  Half-damages are paid in cases where an animal damages in an unusual fashion, and it has not previously done so three times.  Full damages are paid in all other cases.  Double payment refers to a thief’s obligation to pay back double the theft.  Four and five times payment is what a thief must restore if he sold or slaughtered the stolen animal. 
Section two:  One of the penalties for rape and seduction of a virgin is a fine to the father of the girl.
Section three:  Striking one’s parent and not causing a wound is punishable by a financial penalty, as are all cases of personal injury.  In mishnah seven this will be contrasted with striking one’s parent and causing a wound, which is punishable by death.
Section four:   Injuring another person and causing a wound or burning their haystack on the Day of Atonement is punishable by kareth (excommunication) and a financial penalty.  In mishnah seven we will learn that doing either of these two things on the Sabbath is punishable by death.  As we shall learn there, there is a general rule in Jewish law that if a person does one action for which he is liable to pay money and to be executed he is executed and does not owe money (see Bava Kamma 8:5).  However, if by one action he is liable for kareth and to pay money, he gets kareth and still has to pay the money (see Bava Kamma 8:3).    
 
Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah five:  Why does the mishnah need to teach section two after having already taught section one?  Would you have been able to learn the ruling with regards to section two from having known only section one?
