Shevuoth, Chapter Three, Mishnayoth Two, Three and Four

Introduction
Mishnayoth two, three and four continue to discuss a person who swears not to eat, how many sacrifices he will be obligated if he does eat, and the precise definition of “food”.  

Mishnah Two
“I swear I shall not eat,” and he ate wheat bread, barley bread, and spelt bread, he is liable only once. 
“I swear I shall not eat wheat bread, barley bread, and spelt bread,” and he ate [all three], he is liable for each one. 

Explanation—Mishnah Three
Similar to the end of the first mishnah, we learn here that if a person made one oath not to eat and did not specify what foods were covered, he will be obligated to bring only one sacrifice if he were to break the oath.  If, however, he specifically swore not to eat three different types of bread and he ate all three, he is obligated to bring three sacrifices.  In this case he has actually sworn three oaths and subsequently broken three oaths, thereby making him obligated for three sacrifices.

Mishnah Three
“I swear I shall not drink,” and he drank many liquids, he is liable only once. 
“I swear I shall not drink wine, oil, and honey,” and he drank [all three], he is liable for each one. 

Explanation—Mishnah Three
This mishnah teaches the same law as the previous mishnah, except it discusses drinking.  Again we learn that if he specifies what he will not drink, he has sworn (and then broken) three separate oaths and he will be obligated for three separate sacrifices.  If he makes one general oath, he will be obligated to bring only one separate sacrifice.  

Mishnah Four
“I swear I shall not eat,” and he ate foods which are not fit to be eaten, and drank liquids which are not fit to be drunk, he is exempt.   
“I swear I shall not eat,” and he ate carrion, trefot, and reptiles and creepy things, he is liable.   
Rabbi Shimon exempts him.   
He said, “I vow that my wife shall not benefit from me, if I have eaten today,” and he had eaten carrion, trefot, forbidden animals, or reptiles, his wife is prohibited to him.

Explanation—Mishnah Four
Section one:  Again this mishnah discusses a person who swears not to eat.  In this case after having sworn not to eat he eats food which are not fit to be eaten, for example rotten fruit, or drinks liquids not fit to drink.  The mishnah teaches that in such a case he is exempt from having to bring a sacrifice.  The assumption is that when a person swears not to eat his intention is not to eat food that is fit for consumption.  Therefore, by eating food not fit for consumption he has not in actuality broken his oath.
Section two:  In this case the person who swore not to eat, ate foods which are forbidden to a Jew.  Carrion are animals that died either a natural death or died as a result of an improperly carried out act of ritual slaughter.  Trefot are animals that were either torn by beasts of prey or afflicted with severe diseases or defects that would have caused them to die within 12 months.  They are both forbidden to eat, as are reptiles and creepy things.  If one swears not to eat them and does eat them, according to the first opinion he is liable to bring a sacrifice.  Even though he is forbidden to eat them, they are still considered edible food, which other people eat, and therefore he has broken his oath.  
Rabbi Shimon disagrees.  According to his opinion, at Mount Sinai the Jewish people took an oath not to break the commandments. This oath was binding for all future generations as well.  Therefore, one cannot add another oath to that which he has already sworn not to do.  One who does so has not done anything legally significant, and is therefore not obligated to bring a sacrifice.
Section three:  This section discusses vows (nedarim) which are halachically different from oaths (shevuoth).  If a man took a vow that if he had already eaten today his wife would be forbidden to benefit from him or his property, and he had in fact eaten a forbidden thing, she is forbidden to benefit from him.  This law is agreed upon by all of the Sages, even Rabbi Shimon. Rabbi Shimon in essence does consider eating forbidden food to be considered eating.  The reason that he exempted the one who swore not to eat and then ate forbidden food was that there was a prior existing oath upon him not to eat.  In the case in our section, this logic is not applicable.

Questions for Further Thought:
Mishnah four, section three:  How do you know that Rabbi Shimon would agree to the ruling stated in section three?    


