Mishna Sotah
סוטא
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

A man who warns his wife: Rabbi Eliezer says: he warns her [of his suspicions] before two [witnesses], and he makes her drink [the bitter water of the Sotah ceremony] by the word of one witness or by his own testimony. Rabbi Joshua says: he warns her before two witnesses and makes her drink on the testimony of two [witnesses].
How does he warn her? He says to her before two [witnesses]: "Do not speak with a certain man." And if she speaks with him, she is still permitted in her house [to have sexual relations with her husband] and permitted to eat the Terumah [if she is married to a Kohen].  If she meets with him secretly in a house and stays with him long enough to become unclean, she is forbidden to her house [her husband] and forbidden to eat the Terumah.  And if [her husband] dies, she performs the Chalitza ceremony and does not contract a Levirate Marriage [to one of his male relatives].
And these [women] are forbidden to eat the Terumah: those who say "I am unclean for you"; those for whom witnesses testified that she was unclean; those who say "I will not drink [the Sotah water]"; those whose husbands do not wish to make them drink [the Sotah water]; those whose husbands had relations with them on the way [to the court where the Sotah ceremony would be performed].  And how does he act towards her?  He brings her to the court that is in that place, and they assign him two wise scholars, lest he have relations with her on the way. Rabbi Yehudah says: her husband is trusted with her.
They would bring her to the high court that is in Jerusalem, and they intimidate her in the way they would intimidate witnesses in capital cases. And they say to her, "My daughter, wine does much, levity does much, youth does much, bad neighbors do much. Act for the sake of the great Name written in holiness, so that it will not be erased by the water." And they speak before her about things that she is not worthy to hear, she and the entire family of her father's house.
If she says "I am impure," she is breaking her marriage settlement, and she departs. And if she says "I am pure," they bring her up to the eastern gate by the entrance of the Gate of Nicanor, where the Sotahs are made to drink, where they purify women after childbirth and where they purify lepers.  And a priest grasps her garment, if it tears then it tears, if it rips then it rips, till he has bared her heart [bosom], and he loosens her hair. Rabbi Yehudah says: if her bosom is beautiful, he does not bare it.  And if her hair is beautiful, he does not loosen it.
If she was clothed in white, they clothe her in black. If there were golden jewelry on her, necklaces, nose-rings and finger-rings, they remove them from her so that she becomes loathly. And after that he takes an Egyptian rope and ties it above her breasts. And all those who wish to see, come to see, apart from her manservants and maidservants, due to her heart being coarse with them. And all the women are permitted to see her, as it is said (in Ezekiel 23:48) "And all the women will be warned not to act according to your lewdness."
In the measure that a man measures, so it is measured out to him.  She adorned her body in order to transgress, God has made her loathly; she exposed her body in order to transgress, God has exposed her. She began the transgression with the thigh and afterwards with the womb; she will therefore be punished first with the thigh and afterwards with the womb, and the rest of her body shall not escape.
Samson went after [what he lusted for] with his eyes, therefore the Philistines gouged out his eyes, as it says: "And the Philistines took hold of him and gouged out his eyes" (Judges 16:21).  Absalom was proud of his hair, therefore he was hanged by his hair. And because he had sex with the ten concubines of his father, he was pierced by ten darts, as it says: "And ten young men who bore the arms of Joab surrounded [and smote Absalom and killed him]" (II Samuel 18:15). And because he stole three hearts, the heart of his father, the heart of the court, and the heart of Israel, as it says: "And Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel" (II Samuel 15:6); therefore three darts were thrust through him, as it says: "And he took three darts in his hand and he thrust them into the heart of Absalom" (II Samuel 18:14).
And so it is for good things; Miriam waited for Moses for one week, as it says (Exodus 2): "and his sister stood by him from far away", therefore she merited to have the Jewish people wait for her for a week in the desert, as it says (Numbers 12): "and the nation did not travel until Miriam was gathered with them". Joseph merited to bury his father, because none of his brothers were greater than he, as it says (Genesis 50): "and Joseph went up (to Israel) to bury his father, and chariots and cavalry went up with him". Who among us was greater than Joseph, that only Moses was permitted to deal with him? Moses merited to carry Josephs bones to Israel, and none of Israel was greater than him, as it says (Exodus 13): "and Moses took the bones of Joseph with him". Who among us was greater than Moses, that only God merited to deal with him, as it says (Deuteronomy 34): "and he (God) buried him (Moses) in the valley". And not only did God deal with the burial of Moses, but he does so with all righteous people, as it says (Isaiah 58): "and your righteousness shall go before you, and the glory of God shall gather you up".

Chapter 2

Her Mincha offering was brought in an Egyptian basket and given to her into her hand in order to tire her. All Mincha offerings start and end in service-vessels, but this one starts in an Egyptian basket and ends in service-vessels. All Mincha offerings require oil and frankincense, but this one does not require neither oil nor frankincense. All Mincha offerings come from wheat, but this one comes from barley. The Mincha offering of the omer, though it is come from barley, it is come from that which was sifted, but this one comes from unsifted. Rabbi Gamliel said: Just as her deeds were like those of an animal, so too is her sacrifice from food for animals.
He brought a new clay, and gave into it half a measure of water from the basin. R. Yehuda said: a quarter (of a measure). For just as he minimizes the (amount of) writing, so too does he minimize the (amount of) water. He entered the Sanctuary and faced to the right, and there was a place one cubit by one cubit and a marble table with a ring that was affixed to it. And when he lifted it, he took dust from beneath it and gave enough so that it could be seen on the water, as it is said (Numbers 5): and from the dust that was on the floor of the Tabernacle the priest will take and give to the water.
When he comes to write the scroll, from which place does he write? (Numbers 5) From: if no man has lain" etc. and "if you have strayed while under (the authority of) your husband." But he does not write: "And the Cohein should administer an oath to the woman." And he writes: "May God give you as a curse and as an oath," "that these curse-causing waters will come into your intestines to distend your belly and to collapse your thighs." But he does not write: "and the woman shall say 'Amen Amen'". R. Yosi said: he does not interrupt (the text). R. Yehuda said: all himself he does not write only, "May God give you as a curse and as an oath" etc. "that these curse-causing waters will come into your intestines" etc. And he does not write, "and the woman shall say 'Amen Amen'".
He may not write upon the tablet and not upon the papyrus and not upon the (unprocessed) animal hide rather upon the scroll, as it is said: in a book. And he may not write not with gum and not with vitriol and not with anything that leaves an impression, rather with ink, as it says: "and blot out", a writing that can be erased.
To what does she respond 'Amen Amen'? Amen to the curse, Amen to the oath. Amen with regard to this man, Amen with regard to another man. Amen that I did not commit adultery while betrothed or while awaiting levirate marriage or while married, Amen that I did not become impure. And if I became impure, may they be upon me. R. Meir said: Amen that I did not become impure, Amen that I will not become impure.
Everyone agrees that he may not stipulate with her - not about before she was betrothed and not about after she is divorced. If she secluded herself after (she was divorced) and became impure and after that he remarried her, he may not stipulate with her (about this). This is the rule, any (incident where) she engaged in sexual intercourse and she was not permitted to him, he may not stipulate with her (about it).

Chapter 3

Her mincha offering was taken from within the Egyptian basket and it was given into a service-vessel, and it was given into her hand. And the Cohein placed his hand underneath hers and lifted it up.
He lifted (it) and presented (it), grabbed a handful (of it) and burned it as an offering, and the remainder was eaten by the priests. She was given to drink and after that her mincha offering was sacrificed. R. Shimon said: her mincha offering was sacrificed and after that she was given to drink, as it is said (Numbers 5): "and after he shall give the woman water to drink." If  he gave her to drink and after that her mincha offering was sacrificed, it is valid.
If she said, "I will not drink [it]" before the scroll was erased, the scroll is archived, and her meal-offering is scattered on the ashes [of the altar]. Additionally, her scroll is not valid to be used with (lit. "to make drink") another suspected-adulteress.   If the scroll was erased and she [only then] said, "I am impure," the water is spilled, and her meal-offering is scattered on the ashes [of the altar]. [However,] if the scroll was erased and she said, "I will not drink [it]," we beseech (or, "yell at") her and make her drink against her will.
She [barely] finishes drinking before her face becomes green (or "yellow"), her eyes bulge, and she [seems] filled with sinews (or "viens"), and they [the priests] say, "remove her [from the Temple], so she does not defile the courtyard!"  If she has [past] merit, it [the effects described above] would stand (lit. "hang") [waiting]. There is merit that causes it to stand for one year, there is [also] merit that causes it to stand for two years, [and] there is [also] merit that causes it to stand for three years.   From here Ben 'Azai says: "a man is obligated to teach his daughter Law ["Torah"], for if she [comes to a situation where she] drinks [as a suspected-adulteress], she would know that the merit [of the Torah study] causes it to stand for her.   Rabbi Eli'ezer [disagrees and] says: "Whomever teaches his daughter Law ["Torah"], is considered as if he taught her foolishness.   Rabbi Joshua says: "A woman desires a kav and foolishness more than nine kavs and abstinence." He would [further] say: "A foolish pious man, a cunning evil man, a [apparently] abstinent woman, and beatings of abstinent ones, these all are ones who destroy the world."
Rabbi Simeon says: "Merit does not cause it [the effects described above] to stand (lit. "hang") with the bitter waters [of the suspected-adulteress]. Because, if you were to say 'merit causes it to stand' regarding the bitter waters, you are dulling the [power of] the water in the face (i.e. eyes) of all the women who [are to] drink, and you cause a bad name (= spread lies) regarding the pure [women] who drank, since people [will] say, 'They are in fact impure, rather merit caused it to stand for them.'"   Rebbi says: "Merit [indeed] causes it to stand regarding the bitter waters, and she [in fact] does not give birth nor does she improve; rather, continuously degenerates, [and] in the end she dies by that very death."
[If] her flour-offering became defiled before it became sanctified in a vessel, behold it is like all other flour-offerings and is redeemed. But if [it became defiled] once it was sanctified in a vessel, behold it is like all other flour-offerings and is burned. These are [the cases] whose flour-offerings are burnt: One who says "I am impure to you," one who witnesses have come [and said] she is impure, one who says "I will not drink [the bitter-waters,]" one whose husband does not want to cause her to drink, and one whose husband cohabits with her along the way [to the Temple.] Additionally, all those who are married to priests have their flour-offerings burnt.
A daughter of an Israelite who married a priest has her flour-offering burnt. [However,] A priestess who married an Israelite has her flour-offering eaten. What is the difference between a priest and a priestess? The flour-offering of a priestess is eaten, [and] the flour-offering of a priest is not eaten. [Additionally,] a priestess [may] become a "halal," and a priest [may not] become a "halal." A priestess [may] defile herself to the dead, and a priest [may not] defile himself to the dead. A priest takes part in eat holy of holies [sacrifices], and a priestess does not take part in eating holy of holies [sacrifices].
What distinguishes a man from a woman? A man lets his hair grow and strips, and a woman does not let her hair grow or strip. A man makes a vow rendering his son a Nazirite, and a woman does not make a promise rendering her son a Nazirite. A man shaves concerning the Nazirite status of his father [if his father dies], and a woman does not shave concerning the Nazirite status of her father [in the parallel case]. A man sells his daughter, and a woman does not sell her daughter. A man betroths his daughter, and a woman does not betroth her daughter. A man is stoned naked, and a woman is not stoned naked. A man in hung up [after stoning], and a woman is not hung up. A man is sold in his theft [i.e., to repay it], a woman is not sold in her theft.

Chapter 4

An engaged woman and a woman waiting for her brother-in-law to mature for marriage, they don't drink the waters and they don't take their kesubah. As it says,"that the woman was immoral under her husband" which excludes an engaged woman or one waiting for her brother-in-law to mature for marriage. A widow married to a Cohen Gadol, a divorcée and a woman who was exempted from yibum through chalitzah married to a regular Cohen, a female mamzer or a female nesin, they don't drink the waters and don't take their kesubah.
And these are those that don't drink and don't take a kesubah. One who says, "I am impure" (through immoral relations) , or one who witnesses come and say she is impure, and one who says "I won't drink." If her husband says "I won't give her to drink," or her husband comes upon her on the way (to the Temple), she takes her kesubah and doesn't drink. If her husband dies before she drinks, Beis Shammai say, she takes her kesubah and doesn't drink. And Beis Hillel say, she doesn't drink and doesn't take her kesubah.
One who is pregnant from a previous marriage and one who is nursing from a previous marriage, they don't drink the waters or take their kesubah. These are the words of Rabbi Meir. The Sages say, he is able to separate from her and return to her after some time. An aylonis and a old woman who is not able to give birth, they don't drink or take a kesubah. Rabbi Eliezer says, he is able to marry another wife and to procreate from her. The rest of the women, either drink or take their kesubah.
The wife of a Cohen drinks the waters and is permitted to her spouse. The wife of a eunuch drinks. On behalf of seclusion with any forbidden relationship she may be warned, except for with that of a minor or one who is not a man (i.e. an animal).
...These are those that the court warns them: One who's spouse became deaf or foolish, or was put in prison. Not to make her drink was this said, rather to invalidate her from her kesubah. Rabbi Yosi says, even to make her drink, when her husband gets out of prison they make her drink.

Chapter 5

Just as the water checks her (i.e. the sotah), so does the water check him (i.e. the one with whom she had an affair), as it says (Bamidbar 5) "and it should enter," "and it should enter" Just as she is forbidden to the husband she is also forbidden to the one with whom she had an affair, as it says, "is defiled", "and is defiled." These are the words of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yehoshua says, like that explains Rabbi Zechariah ben HaKatzav. Rabbi says, two times it says in the section "if she is defiled" "she is defiled" one for the husband, and one for whom she had an affair with.
On that day (i.e. the day Rabban Gamliel was deposed from the position of Prince) Rabbi Akiva expounded, "and any earthenware vessel that any of them (i.e. sheretzim) fall into it, whatever is in it shall become impure (yitma)"(Vayikra 11), it does not say tamei rather yitma, to make other things impure to teach about a second degree impure loaf can make another a third degree loaf. Rabbi Yehoshua says, who will remove the dirt from your eyes Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai? Because you use to say that in the future another generation with declare pure a third degree loaf, because there is no verse from the Torah that it is impure, and behold Akiva your student brings for him a verse from the Torah that it is impure, as it says, "all that is in it yitma (makes impure)."
On that day, Rabbi Akiva expounded: "'And the measurement [belonging to the Levites] outside the [Levite] city in the eastern outskirts, 2000 cubits...' (Numbers 35:5), and another source says '... from the wall of the city and outward, 1000 cubits around.' (ibid, 35:4) It is impossible to say 1000 cubits, for it already said 2000 cubits, and it is impossible to say 2000 cubits, for it already said 1000 cubits. Here is how it is explained: 1000 cubits is for the land, and 2000 cubits is the Sabbath domain [the distance one from the city can travel on Sabbath]." Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Yosi the Galilian says, 1000 cubits is for the land, and two thousand cubits is for fields and orchards.
On that day, Rabbi Akiva expounded: "'Thus Moshe and the Children of Israel sang this song to G-d, and they spoke, saying...' (Exodus 15:1), you should not read 'saying,' and what does the verse mean by 'saying?' It means the Israel was answering each phrase after Moshe, like the reading of Hallel, thus it says 'saying.' Rabbi Nechemiah says, like the reading of the Shema, and not like the reading of Hallel.
On that day [when Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria was appointed Nasi] Rabbi Yehoshua ben Hurkenus taught that Iyov only served G-d through love as it says (Iyov 13) "[If] they kill me, to Him [G-d] I will hope" Yet still the matter is uncertain. [Does it mean] 'To Him' do I hope or 'I don't hope in Him'? (This is a play on text. The word 'lo' in hebrew means both 'him' and 'not'. In the verse it is written as 'him' but our tradition is that it is pronounced as 'not'). We learn [however] (ibid 27) "Until I expire my perfection will not be removed from me" where we learn that he only served Him from love. Rabbi Yehoshua said, "Who will remove the dust from your eyes, Rabbi Yochanan ben Zachai, that you used to teach all your life that Iyov only served G-d through fear, as it says, (ibid 1) 'A perfect and straight man should fear G-d and remove himself', but Yehoshua your student's student learned that he [served Him] through love!"

Chapter 6

Someone who warned his wife [against being secluded with a certain man] and then she secluded herself [with him], even if [this event] was heard about through a 'fluttering bird' (i.e. any means of invalid testimony), she must get divorced and he [the husband] must give her [the value of] the Ketuba. These are the words of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehoshua says that [she must get divorced] only when [the rumor] is picked up by the moonlight gossipers (i.e. woman who sew at night)
[If] one witness said "I saw her commit adultery," she no longer drinks [the Sotah waters]. This law even includes [testimony from] a slave and even a maidservant, and these people are even believed to disqualify her from [receiving] her Ketuba. [If] her mother-in-law or daughter-in-law or her co-wife or her Yevama (dead husband's brother's wife) or her husband's daughter (from another marriage) [testifies about her committing adultery], they are believed, but not in order to disqualify her from [receiving] her Ketuba, only from drinking [the Sotah water]
And this [the law that one witness is believed by seclusion] could be [derived] logically: Just like the first testimony [of the husband warning his wife] that doesn't make her prohibited [from being married to him], it is only valid through two [witnesses]. The last testimony [that she secluded herself] that does forbid her [from being married to] her husband, is it not logical that it should only be valid with two [witnesses]. [Therefore] we learn [from the verse] "and there was no witness in it" [where the extra words 'in it' refer to allowing] any testimony that there is. [But now] there is a logical induction from this! Just like the last testimony prohibits her [from her husband] forever and it is valid through [only] one witness, the first testimony that doesn't prohibit her [from her husband] forever is it not logical that it should be valid with [only] one [witness]! [Therefore] we learn [from the verse] (Devarim 24) 'When it is found in her a sexual matter (i.e. she committed a sexual crime)" and earlier [it says] (ibid 19) "through two witnesses the matter will be upheld". Just like [by ch. 19] it [the testimony] is through two witnesses, so to here [by ch. 24] it is through two witnesses.
[If] one witness says "she committed adultery" and [another] witness says "she did not commit adultery" or a woman says "she committed adultery" and [another] witness says "she did not commit adultery", she would drink [the Sotah waters]. [If] one [witness] says "she committed adultery" and two [witnesses] say "she did not commit adultery", she would drink [the Sotah waters]. [If] two [witnesses] say "she committed adultery" and one [witness] says "she did not commit adultery" she would not drink [the Sotah waters].

Chapter 7

The following are said in any language: the paragraph of Sotah (where the kohen explains the Sotah process to the woman), confession of tithes (where one says he has obeyed the laws of the tithes), Shema, Davening (or Shemona Esrei), [the final] blessing on a meal, the oath of testimony (i.e. when someone makes you swear that you don't know about his case), the oath about collateral (i.e. when you make someone swear he doesn't have your object) 
(Note: all these terms are discussed in further detail throughout the next three chapters) And these are said [only] in Hebrew: The paragraph of Bikkurim (stated when Bikkurim are brought), Halitza (i.e. the paragraph that the women reads responding to the man performing Halitza), the blessings and curses (said when the Jews first entered Israel), the Blessing of the Kohanim, the Blessing of the Kohen Gadol (said on Yom Kippur), the paragraph of the king (said during hakeil), the paragraph of Egla Arufa (the calf that is killed as atonement for an unsolved murder) and the annointed war [Kohen] when he would speak to the nation
How [do we know that] the paragraph about Bikkurim [must be said in Hebrew]? [It says] (Devarim 26) "and you will answer and say before Hashem your G-d" and later on [by the blessings and curses, it says] "and the Leviim answered and said". Just like answering and saying later is [referring to] Hebrew [speech], so to here [it is referring to] Hebrew [speech].
How [do we know] Halitza [must be said in Hebrew]? [It says] (ibid 25) "and she answered and said" and later on it says (ibid 28) "and the Leviim answered and said". Just like answering and saying later [by the Leviim] is in Hebrew, so too here it is in Hebrew. Rabbi Yehuda said [we learn this law from] "and she answered and said like this". [Halitza is only valid] when she said it in Hebrew.
How were the blessings and curses [pronounced]? 
Once Israel crossed the Jordan and came to Mt. Gerizim and Mt. Ebal which are in Samaria, next to Shechem which is next to the terebinths of Moreh, as it is said, “Are they not the other side of the Jordan, [beyond the west road that is in the land of the Canaanites who dwell in the Arabah—near Gilgal, by the terebinths of Moreh] (Deut. 11:30), and elsewhere it says, “And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Shechem unto the terebinth of Moreh” (Genesis 12:6)—just as the terebinth of Moreh mentioned in this latter verse is Shechem, so the terebinth of Moreh mentioned in the former verse is Shechem.
For there six tribes went up Mt. Gerizim and six tribes went up Mt. Ebal, and the priests and Levites with the ark stood below in the middle, the priests surrounding the ark, the Levites [surrounding] the priests, and all Israel on this side and that side, as it is said, “And all Israel, with their elders, officials, and judges stood on both sides of the ark, facing the levitical priests” (Joshua 8:33).   
They turned their faces towards Mt. Gerizim and opened with the blessing:
Blessed be anyone who does not make a graven or molten image”.
And these and these respond amen. 
They then turned their faces towards Mt. Ebal and opened with the curse: 
“Cursed be anyone who makes a graven or molten image” (Deut. 27:15).
And these and these respond amen. 
Until they complete the blessings and curses. 
After that they brought the stones, built the altar and plastered it with plaster, and inscribed upon it all the words of the Torah in seventy languages, as it is said, “most distinctly (be’er hetev).   
Then they took the stones and went and spent the night in their place. 

How was the priestly blessing [pronounced]? 
In the province (outside of the Temple) it was said as three blessings, but in the Temple as one blessing.   
In the Temple he says the name as it is written, but in the province in its substituted name.  
In the province the priests raise their hands at the height of their shoulders, but in the Temple above their heads, except the high priest who does not raise his hands higher than the frontlet.  
Rabbi Judah says: even the high priest raises his hands higher than the frontlet, as it says, “And Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them” (Leviticus 9:22). 

How were the blessings of the high priest [recited]?  
The hazzan of the synagogue takes the Torah scroll and gives it to the president of the synagogue; the vice-president of the synagogue gives it to the high priest, and the high priest stands, receives [the scroll] and reads [the following portions]:  “After the death” (Leviticus 16:1-34), and “But on the tenth day” (Leviticus 23:26-32).  
Then he rolls the Torah (scroll), places it in his chest and exclaims, “More than I have read before you is written here!” 
“On the tenth day” (Numbers 29:7-11), which is in the book of Numbers, he reads by heart.
And he blesses upon it eight blessings: “For the Torah”, “For the Temple service”, “For thanksgiving”, “For the pardon of sin”, “For the Temple”, “For Israel”,  “For the priests”,  and the rest of the prayer. 

The portion read by the king: How so? 
At the conclusion of the first day of the festival (Sukkot) in the eighth [year], at the end of the seventh year, they made a wooden platform in the Temple court, and he sits upon it, as it is said, “At the end of seven years, in the set time” etc (Deuteronomy 31:10). 
The hazzan takes a Torah scroll and hands it to the head of the synagogue, the head of the synagogue hands it to the deputy and he hands it to the high priest, and the high priest hands it to the king and the king stands and receives it, but reads it while sitting. 
King Agrippa stood and received it and read standing, and the sages praised him.
When he reached, “You shall not place a foreigner over you” (ibid 17:15) his eyes ran with tears. They said to him, “Fear not, Agrippas, you are our brother, you are our brother!” 
He reads from the beginning of “These are the words” (ibid 1:1) until the Shema (ibid 6:4-9), and the Shema, and “It will come to pass if you hear” (ibid 11:13-21), and “You shall surely tithe” (ibid 14:22-29), and “When you have finished tithing” (ibid 26:12-15) and the portion of the king (ibid 17:14-20) and the blessings and curses (ibid 28), until he finishes all the section. 
The blessings that the high priest blesses, the king recites, except that he substitutes one for the festivals instead of one for the pardon of sin.


Chapter 8

When the anointed for battle talks to the people he would speak in the holy tongue, as it is said, “And it shall be, when you draw near the battle, that the priest shall approach” (Deuteronomy 20:2)—this refers to the anointed for battle.  
“And speak to the people” (ibid) – in the holy tongue.
“He shall say to them, “Hear, O Israel, you are about to join battle with your enemy” (vs. 3)— “with your enemy” but not against your brother, not Judah against Shimon nor Shimon against Benjamin, that if you fall into their hand they shall have mercy on you, as it is said, “Then the men named above proceeded to take the captives in hand, and with booty they clothed all the naked among them—they clothed them and shod them and gave them to eat and drink and anointed them and provide donkeys for all who were failing and brought them to Jericho, the city of palms, back to their kinsmen. Then they returned to Samaria” (II Chronicles 28:15).  Rather against your enemies do you march, so that if you fall into their hand they will have no mercy on you.
“Let not your courage falter, fear not, and do not tremble or be in dread of them” (Deuteronomy 20:3)
“Let not your courage falter”-- at the neighing of the horses and the sharpening of swords; 
“Fear not” --at the crash of shields and the tramp of the soldiers shoes; 
“Do not tremble” -- at the sound of trumpets; 
“Or be in dread of them” -- at the sound of battle cries. 
“For it is the Lord your God that goes with you”--they come [relying] upon the might of flesh and blood, but you come [relying] upon the might of the Omnipresent. 
The Philistines came [relying] upon the power of Goliath (I Samuel 17:4 ff.), but what happened to him in the end? In the end he fell by the sword and they fell with him. 
The Ammonites came [relying] upon the power of Shobach (II Samuel 10:16-18), but what happened to him in the end? In the end he fell by the sword and they fell with him. 
But with you it is not like that, “For it is the Lord your God that goes with you”—this refers to the camp of the ark.

“Then the officers shall address the people saying:  ‘Is there anyone who has built a new house but has not dedicated it? Let him go back to his home’” (Deuteronomy 20:5).  
It is the same whether he built a house for straw, a house for cattle, a house for wood, or a storehouse;
It is the same whether he built, purchased, inherited or somebody gave it to him as a present.   
“‘Is there anyone who has planted a vineyard but has never harvested it?’” (vs. 6).
It is the same whether he planted a vineyard or planted five fruit-trees and even of five different species;   
It is the same whether he planted, bent or grafted it, or whether he purchased, inherited or somebody gave it to him as a present. 
“‘Is there anyone who has betrothed a woman [but who has not yet married her]?’” (vs. 7)  
It is the same whether he had betrothed a virgin or a widow, or even a woman awaiting levirate marriage, or even if a man heard that his brother had died in battle, he returns home. 
All these hear the priest’s words concerning the battles of war and return home, and they supply water and food and repair the roads.

The following do not return home: 
He who built a gatehouse, a portico or a porch; 
He who planted four fruit trees or five trees which are not fruit-bearing; 
He who took back his divorced wife. 
If a high priest married a widow, or an ordinary priest married a divorcee or a woman who had been released from levirate marriage, or an Israelite married a mamzeret or a netinah, or the daughter of an Israelite married a mamzer or a natin, he does not return home.   
Rabbi Judah says: even he who builds a house upon its [original] foundations does not return home. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: even he who builds a brick-house in the Sharon does not return home.

The following do not move from their place:   
He who built a new house and dedicated it, 
He who planted a vineyard and redeemed its fruit, 
He who married his betrothed, 
He who brought in his dead husband's wife; 
As it is said, “He shall be exempt one year for the sake of his household [to give happiness to the woman he married]” (Deuteronomy 24:5)  
“His household,” this refers to his house; 
“Shall be” refers to his vineyard; 
“To give happiness to the wife” refers to his wife; 
“He married” to include his dead brother's wife. 
These do not supply water and food and repair the roads.

“Then the officers shall go on addressing the troops and say, ‘Is there anyone afraid and disheartened’” (Deuteronomy 20:8).   
Rabbi Akiva says: “afraid and disheartened” is to be understood literally, that he cannot stand in the battle lines and see a drawn sword. 
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: “afraid and disheartened”—this is the one who is afraid because of the transgressions he has committed; therefore the Torah connected all these with him that he may return home on their account.   
Rabbi Yose says: a high priest who married a widow, an ordinary priest who married a divorcee or woman released from levirate marriage, an Israelite who married a mamzeret or netinah, and the daughter of an Israelite who married a mamzer or a natin—behold this one is “afraid and disheartened.”

“And it shall be, when the officers have finished speaking to the people, they shall appoint captains of hosts at the head of the people” (Deuteronomy 20:9).   
And at the rear of the people they station guards in front of them and others behind them, with iron axes in their hands, and should anyone wish to flee, they have permission to strike his thighs, because the beginning of falling [in battle] is fleeing,  as it is said, “Israel fled before the Philistines, and the people also suffered a great slaughter” (I Samuel 4:17) and elsewhere it states, “And the men of Israel fled before the Philistines and fell down slain” (ibid 31:1).

To what this apply?  To a voluntary war.
But in a war commanded [by the Torah] all go out, even a bridegroom from his room and a bride from her canopy.  
Rabbi Judah says: to what does this apply? To a war commanded by the Torah, but in an obligatory war all go out, even a bridegroom from his chamber and a bride from her canopy.


Chapter 9

[The declaration over] the heifer whose neck is to be broken must be in the holy tongue; as it is said, “If a corpse is found slain on the land . . . then your elders and judges shall go out” (Deuteronomy 21:1-2)--three used to go out from the high court in Jerusalem. 
Rabbi Judah says: five, as it is said, “Your elders”—two, “and your judges”—two, and there cannot be a court of an even number, so they add one more.

If [the corpse] was found buried underneath a heap of stones, or hanging on a tree, or floating on the surface of the water, they would not break [the heifer’s neck], as it says: “In the earth” — and not buried underneath a heap of stones, "fallen" not hanging on a tree; “In a field” —and not floating on the surface of the water. 
If it was found near the border, or a city whose majority of inhabitants were non-Jews, or a city in which there is no court, they would not break [the heifer's neck]. 
They measure the distance only from a city in which there is a court.
If [the corpse] was found exactly between two cities, both of them would bring two heifers [between them], the words of Rabbi Eliezer; 
And Jerusalem does not bring a heifer whose neck is to be broken.

If the head was found in one place and the body in another place, they bring the head to the body, the words of Rabbi Eliezer.   
Rabbi Akiva says: [they bring] the body to the head.

From what part do they measure? 
Rabbi Eliezer says: from the navel.
Rabbi Akiva says: from the nose. 
Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob says: from the place where he was made a slain person, from the neck.

The elders of Jerusalem departed and went away. 
The elders of that city bring “a heifer which has never been worked, which has never been yoked” (Deuteronomy 21:3).
And a blemish does not disqualify it. 
They bring it down to a hard (etan) wadi— “etan” is understood in its literal sense of “hard”.
Even if it is not “hard”, it is valid. 
They break its neck with a hatchet from behind.   
And its place may never be sown or tilled, but it is permitted to comb flax there and chisel rocks there.

The elders of that city wash their hands with water in the place where the heifer's neck was broken and they say, “Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it” (Deuteronomy 21:7).   
But did we really think that the elders of the court are shedders of blood! 
Rather, he did not come to us and we dismissed him without supplying him with food and we did not see him and let him go without escort.  
Then the priests exclaim, “Absolve, O Lord, Your people Israel, whom You redeemed, and do not let guilt for the blood of the innocent remain among your people Israel” (vs. 8).  
They did not need to say, “And they will be absolved of bloodguilt” (ibid), rather the Holy Spirit announces to them, “When you act in this way, the blood is forgiven you.”

If the murderer was discovered before the heifer’s neck was broken, it goes free and grazes with the herd; 
But if after the heifer’s neck was broken, it is buried in that place because it came there from the outset in connection with a matter of doubt, and atoned for the doubt which is now gone. 
If the heifer’s neck was broken and afterwards the murderer is discovered, behold he is executed.


One e witness says “I saw the murderer” and one witness says “You did not see him”; or a woman says “I saw him” and another woman says “You did not see him”, they break its neck. 
If one witness says “I saw him” and two say “You did not see him”, they break its neck. 
If two say “We saw him” and one says to them “You did not see him”, they do not break its neck.  

When murderers multiplied, the [ceremony of] breaking a heifer’s neck ceased. 
From the time that Eliezer ben Dinai came, and he was also called Tehinah ben Perisha and he was afterwards renamed “son of the murderer”.
When adulterers multiplied, the ceremony of the bitter waters ceased and it was Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai who discontinued it, as it is said, “I will not punish their daughters for fornicating, nor their daughters-in-law for committing adultery, for they themselves [turn aside with whores and sacrifice with prostitutes]” (Hosea 4:14).   
When Yose ben Yoezer of Zeredah and Yose ben Yohanan of Jerusalem died, the grape-clusters ceased, as it is said, “There is not a cluster [of grapes] to eat; not a ripe fig I could desire [The pious are vanished from the land, none upright are left among men” (Micah 7:1-2).  

When Rabbi Meir died, the composers of fables ceased. 
When Ben Azzai died, the diligent students [of Torah] ceased. 
When Ben Zoma died, the expounders ceased.   
When Rabbi Joshua died, goodness ceased from the world.  
When Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel died, locusts came and troubles multiplied. 
When Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah died, the sages ceased to be wealthy.
When Rabbi Akiba died, the glory of the Torah ceased. 
When Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa died, men of wondrous deeds ceased. 
When Rabbi Yose Katnuta died, the pious men (hasidim) ceased—and why was his name called Katnuta? Because he was the youngest of the pious men.   
When Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai died, the splendor of wisdom ceased.   
When Rabban Gamaliel the elder died, the glory of the torah ceased, and purity and separateness perished. 
When Rabbi Ishmael ben Fabi died, the splendor of the priesthood died. 
When Rabbi died, humility and fear of sin ceased.   
Rabbi Phineas ben Yair says: when Temple was destroyed, scholars and freemen were ashamed and covered their head, men of wondrous deeds were disregarded, and violent men and big talkers grew powerful.  And nobody expounds, nobody seeks, and nobody asks.   Upon whom shall we depend? Upon our father who is in heaven. 
Rabbi Eliezer the Great says: from the day the Temple was destroyed, the sages began to be like scribes, scribes like synagogue-attendants, synagogue-attendants like common people, and the common people became more and more debased.  And nobody seeks. Upon whom shall we depend? Upon our father who is in heaven.  In the footsteps of the messiah insolence (hutzpah) will increase and the cost of living will go up greatly; the vine will yield its fruit, but wine will be expensive; the government will turn to heresy, and there will be no one to rebuke; the meeting-place [of scholars] will be used for licentiousness; the Galilee will be destroyed, the Gablan will be desolated, and the dwellers on the frontier will go about [begging] from place to place without anyone to take pity on them; the wisdom of the learned will rot, fearers of sin will be despised, and the truth will be lacking; youths will put old men to shame, the old will stand up in the presence of the young, “For son spurns father, daughter rises up against mother, daughter-in-law against mother-in-law—a man’s own household are his enemies” (Micah 7:6). The face of the generation will be like the face of a dog, a son will not feel ashamed before his father. Upon whom shall we depend? Upon our father who is in heaven.
R. Pinchas ben Yair says:  Quickness leads to cleanliness, cleanliness leads to purity, purity leads to separation, separation leads to sanctity, sanctity leads to humility, humility leads to fear of sin, fear of sin leads to piety, piety leads to the Holy Spirit. And the Holy Spirit leads to the resuscitation of the dead, and the the resuscitation of the dead leads to the coming of Elijah, may he be remembered for good, Amen. 
 

Yohanan the high priest brought to an end the confession made over the tithe.   
He also discontinued the wakers and the knockers  
Up to his days the hammer used to strike in Jerusalem, 
And in his days there was no need to inquire about doubtfully tithed produce. 

When the Sanhedrin ceased, song ceased from the places of feasting, as it is said, “They drink their wine without song” (Isaiah 24:9).
When the former prophets died, the Urim and Thummim ceased. 
When Temple was destroyed, the shamir and nopheth zufim ceased.  
And people of faith ceased, as it says, “Help, O Lord, for the faithful are no more” (Psalms 12:2).   
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said in the name of Rabbi Joshua:  from the day the Temple was destroyed, there is no day without a curse, the dew has not descended for a blessing, and the flavor has departed from produce. 
Rabbi Yose says: the fatness was also removed from produce.

Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: [the cessation of observation of the] purity laws has removed taste and fragrance, [the cessation of observation of] the tithes has removed the fatness of grain. But the Sages say: licentiousness and sorcery destroyed everything.

During the war with Vespasian they decreed against crowns worn by bridegrooms and against the bell.   
During the war with Quietus they decreed against crowns worn by brides and that nobody should teach their child Greek. 
During the final war they decreed that a bride should not go out in a palanquin inside the city, but our rabbis decreed that a bride may go out in a palanquin inside the city.
