Mishna Avodah Zarah
עבודה זרה
Open Mishna
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Mishnah

Chapter 1

For a period of three days before Pagan festivals, it is forbidden to engage in business transactions with them, to ask them for something or to be asked for something by them, to lend or to borrow from them, and to absolve (them from debt) or be absolved by them (from debt). Rabbi Yehuda says: (it is permitted) to be absolved (from debt) from them, since it causes them distress. (The Sages) said to him: even though they might be in distress at the outset, they will eventually be happy.
Rabbi Yishmael says: (the above) is forbidden for three days before the festivals and three days after the festivals. The Sages say: (while) it is forbidden before the festivals, it is permitted after the festivals.
And these, according to Rabbi Meir, are the (major) pagan festivals: Kalendis, Saturnalia, Kratesis, kings' days of accession, kings' birthdays, and king' day of death. And the Sages say: every funeral in which a conflagration is present is considered to have idol worship present. If there is no conflagration, then there is no idol worship thought to be present. The day a (pagan) man cuts his beard or his hair, the day that a man comes up from the sea, and the day that a man is released from fetters, and (for) a pagan who made a feast for his son, there is prohibition only on this day and only this man.
It is permitted (to do business) outside of a city that has idol worship inside it. If there is idol worship outside the city, it is permitted (to do business) inside. What about he who should travel to this place --- in the time that the road converges to this place alone, it is forbidden (to do business); but if one can walk on this road from another location, it is permitted (to do business). A city which has in it idol worship and has both decorated and undecorated shop fronts -- this was the case in Beit Shean --- the Sages say: the decorated shops are forbidden (as places in which business can be done) and those shops without decorations are permitted.
The following items are those that are forbidden to be sold to gentiles: iztrobalin, white figs along with their stalks, frankincense, and white chickens. Rabbi Yehuda says: he sells a white chicken to him amongst a group of chickens; in the time that he is by himself, he must clip its toe and sell it, since they do not sacrifice blemished animals to idols. As for all the remaining items, (if their purpose) is not known, it is permitted (to sell), but (if their purpose) is known, it is forbidden (to sell). Rabbi Meir says: even if the items are fine palm dates, sweet dates or the Nikolaos date, it is still forbidden to sell them to gentiles.
A place in which one is accustomed to selling small cattle to gentiles, one can sell. A place that one is not accustomed to selling, one cannot sell. And in every place it is forbidden to sell large (literal translation: coarse,rough) cattle, calves, and foals, complete, or lame. (Literal translation: broken, fractured) Rabbi Yehuda permits in the case of a lame one. Ben Beterah permits in the case of a horse.
One can not sell to them (to gentiles) bears, lions, or anything that can do harm to the public. One cannot build with them a basilica, a scaffold, a stadium, or a stage. But one can build with them public bathhouses or private ones. When they reach the place where they stand an object of idol worship, it is forbidden to help.
One may not make jewelry for purposes of idol worship. Necklaces, nose rings, or rings. Rabbi Eliezer says, 'It is permissible to do so in return for a salary. One may not sell them (gentiles) produce that is unplucked. However one can sell it once it is harvested. Rabbi Yehuda says, 'One can sell (unplucked produce) with an agreement that it will be harvested.' 'One may not rent them houses in Eretz Yisrael. And it is not needed to say fields. (Fields automatically cannot be rented to gentiles due to the prohibition on selling them houses.) And in Syria, you can rent them houses, but not fields. And outside of the Land one can sell them houses and rent them fields'; the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yose says, 'In Eretz Yisrael it is permitted to rent them houses but not fields. In Syria it is permited to sell them houses and rent them fields. And outside of the Land, one can sell both one and the other.
Even in the case that they said that gentiles can rent, it is not as a permanent residence they have ruled, in case the gentile might bring inside an idol. As it is said (Devarim 7:26), 'You shall not bring an abomination into your house.' But one is forbidden in any place, to rent him a private bathhouse, be cause it will be called by his name.

Chapter 2

One should not leave cattle in gentile inns, for they are suspect in regard to bestiality. A woman should not be alone with them for they are suspect in regard to fornication. A man should not be alone with them, for they are suspect in regard to spilling of blood. A daughter of Israel should not be a midwife to a gentile woman. But a gentile woman may be a midwife to a daughter of Israel. A daughter of Israel may not suckle a child of a gentile, but a gentile may suckle a Jewish child, in her domain.
One should accept from them (gentiles) healing for property, but not healing for a person. But one should not have his hair cut by them under any circumstances; the words of Rabbi Meir. And the Sages say, 'It is permitted (having a gentile cut a Jew's hair) in public, but not in private.
These are the things of gentiles that are prohibited and are prohibited from deriving benefit from them at all. Wine, the vinegar of gentiles, which in the beginning was wine, Hadrianic earthenware, and hides that were pierced at the heart. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says, 'If the hole was round at the time of the piercing it is prohibited, but if it was straight, (literal:drawn, pulled) it is allowed. Meat that was coming to an idol, it is allowed, but meat that was coming out, it is prohibited. Because it is like sacrifices of the dead; the words of Rabbi Akiva. Those who are going on an idolatrous pilgrimage, it is forbidden to do business with them. But, those who are coming back, it is permitted. (To do business with them)
The skins of gentiles and their containers (literally: jars, jugs) with Jewish wine collected in them, they are forbidden and one is forbidden to derive benefit from them; the words of Rabbi Meir. The Sages say, 'It is not so that one may not derive benefit from them.' The grape pits and grape skins of gentiles are forbidden and it is forbidden to derive any benefit from them; the words of Rabbi Meir. The Sages say, 'If the grape skins are moist, they are forbidden, if they are dry, they are permitted.' The brine and Bithynian cheese of gentiles, They are forbidden and it is forbidden to derive any benefit from them; the words of Rabbi Meir. The Sages say, 'It is not so that one may not derive benefit from them.'
Rabbi Yehuda says, 'Rabbi Ishmael asked Rabbi Yehoshua, when they were walking along the road, he said to him: "Due to what is gentile cheese prohibited?" He (Rabbi Yehoshua) said to him: "Because they curdle it with rennet from carrion." He (Rabbi Ishmael) said to him "But is not the (law of) rennet of a whole offering more stringent (literal: serious, drastic) than the rennet of carrion? As it is said ________________________ *Please someone put here what ﻿כהן שדעתו יפה שורפה חייב ולא מועלין means!* (Rabbi Yehoshua) He gave as the reason: "Because they curdle it (the cheese) with rennet from calves that were used for idol worship." And he (Rabbi Ishmael) said: "If so, why is there no prohibition to benefit from it?" They redirected (the conversation) to another topic. (Rabbi Yehoshua) He said to him: "Ishmael, my brother, how do you read (Shir HaShirim 1): "For your love (Hebrew: Masculine: Dodecha) is better than wine", or "For your love (Hebrew: feminine: Dodayich) is better than wine"? (Rabbi Yishmael) Said to him (Rabbi Yehoshua) "For your love (Hebrew: feminine: Dodayich) is better than wine." He (Rabbi Yehoshua) said to him (Rabbi Ishmael) "The matter is not so. For its comrade (The following verse) teaches upon it. "For your oils (Hebrew: Masculine: Shmanecha) have a good fragrance."
These are the things of gentiles that are forbidden but it is not forbidden to derive any benefit from them: Milk that was milked without a Jew watching, their (gentiles') bread, their oil, (Rabbi and his court permitted their oil), stewed and pickled vegetables in which it is a custom (for gentiles) to put wine and vinegar, and their minced (literal: mixed) fish (literal: sardines), brine that does not have fish floating in it, chileq fish, a leaf of asafoetida, and sal-conditum. These are the things of gentiles that are forbidden but it is not forbidden to derive any benefit from them.
These are the things (of gentiles) that are allowed to be eaten: Milk that was milked with a Jew watching, the honey, their honeycombs, even though they drip, they do not constitute an unclean liquid, stewed and pickled vegetables in which it is not a custom (for gentiles) to put wine and vinegar inside of them, unminced (literal: unmixed) fish (literal: sardines), and brine that has fish inside of it, (whole) asafoetida leaves, rolled olive buns, Rabbi Yose says, 'Those that are moist are prohibited, locusts from the basket (shopkeeper's) are forbidden but those from the stock (of his shop) are allowed, and so it is for the priestly tithe.

Chapter 3

All images are prohibited, for the reason that each one is worshiped once in the year. Said Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say not all images are prohibited but only the ones who have a stick (staff) in its hand, or a bird, or an orb. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says anything that has anything in its hand (is prohibited).
If one finds a broken image (fragments), see, it is permitted. If one finds the form of a hand or the form of a foot, see, these are prohibited. Because it is derived from transgression (has been worshiped).
If one finds a vessel and on it a drawing of the sun or a drawing of the moon, or a drawing of a dragon, he should cast them into the Salt Sea. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says; if they are treated with honor, they are forbidden, if they are treated disparagingly, they are permitted. Rabbi Yose says; One should grind it (the vessel) to powder and disperse it among the wind, or hurl it into the sea. The Sages said; Even though it might become manure? As it is said: "And let nothing of the ban cling to your hand" (Devarim/Deuteronomy 13:18).