Temurah, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
The first three mishnayot of our chapter deal with what is called “acting deceptively with regard to the first born.” The first-born animal has to be offered as a sacrifice, unless it is blemished. The idea with acting deceptively is that the owner of the animal giving birth wants to use the offspring as another sacrifice that he is obligated to bring. For instance, he vowed to bring an olah, and now he wants to bring the first-born and have it count as the olah. This is sort of like “double-dipping” when it comes to sacrifices, but we can easily understand why this was helpful to someone who might not be able to afford to give away both the first-born and another animal that he owes as a sacrifice. 

Mishnah One
How can we act deceptively with regard to the first-born?  
He says in respect of a pregnant animal which was giving birth for the first time: if what is in the inside of this [animal] is a male, let it be an olah. 
If it then gave birth to a male, it is offered as an olah.  
[If he said:] if it is a female, let it be a shelamim, then if it gave birth to a female, it is offered as a shelamim. 
[If he said:] if it is a male, let it be an olah, and if a female [let it be] a shelamim, then if it gave birth to a male and a female, the male is offered as an olah and the female is offered as a shelamim.  

Explanation
Section one: One can dedicate an animal while it is still in its mother’s womb. Since this animal was dedicated before it was born and become a “first-born” it has the status of an olah and he can use it as such.
Section two: He can make the animal into a shelamim (an offering of wellbeing) by stipulating that it will be a shelamim if it is female. Note that this has nothing to do with the acting deceptively with a first-born because a female animal does not have the status of a first-born. It is only taught here because of the clauses that follow. 
Section two: The person can make a double stipulation and then if both are born, the male is an olah and the female is a shelamim. 
