Temurah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction
The first three mishnayot of our chapter deal with the differences between the laws that apply to things that are dedicated to the altar to be sacrifices and things that are dedicated to the Temple for their proceeds to be used for Temple repairs.
Our mishnah deals with the first half of this equation—laws that apply to dedications to the altar that don’t apply to dedications made for Temple repair. 

Mishnah One
There are [laws] which apply to dedications for the altar which do not apply to dedications   for repairs of the Temple, and there are [laws] which apply to dedications for the repairs of the Temple which do not apply to dedications for the altar. 
Dedications for the altar effect a substitute;
They are subject to the laws of piggul, remnant   and ritual uncleanness;
Their offspring and milk are forbidden [even] after their redemption;  
If one kills them outside [the Temple] he is guilty;
And wages are not paid from them to artisans, 
Which is not the case with dedications for temple repairs.

Explanation
Section one: If one tries to make a substitute for an animal that has been dedicated to be a sacrifice, then the substitute is holy and the original animal retains its holiness. This is not so when it comes to an animal dedicated for Temple repairs (see 1:6).
Section two: If while offering an animal to be a sacrifice one has the intention to eat it or offer its innards on the altar after its prescribed time has expired, the animal is piggul and anyone who eats it is liable for karet (see Zevahim 2:2-3). Remnant (notar) is the meat of a sacrifice that has been left over after its time has expired. Ritual uncleanness refers to either the person eating the sacrifice, or the meat of the sacrifice. These laws refer only to the animals dedicated to be sacrifices, but not to animals dedicated for Temple repairs.
Section three: The offspring and milk of animals dedicated for the altar are always forbidden, even if the animals should become blemished and are then redeemed. Their holiness remains after redemption, and therefore things that come from them are also holy. See Hullin 10:2.
Section four: Slaughtering such an animal outside the Temple is forbidden and will make one liable for karet (see Zevahim 14:1-2).
Section five: Artisans who work in the Temple, building or repairing or other such work, their wages are not paid from animals dedicated for the altar. However, their wages can come from animals dedicated for Temple repairs. 
 
