Temurah, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
At the end of yesterday’s mishnah we learned that animals dedicated, either for the altar or for Temple repair, that then die, must be buried because they cannot be redeemed. Our mishnah lists other things that must be buried. 

Mishnah Four
And the following are things which must be buried:   
A dedicated animal which had a miscarriage, [the miscarriage] must be buried.
A dedicated animal which expelled a placenta, [the placenta] must be buried.   
An ox which was condemned to be stoned.
The heifer whose neck was broken.
The birds [brought in connection with the purification] of one with skin disease (metzora).
The hair of a nazirite.
The first-born of a donkey.  
[A mixture of] meat [cooked] in milk.
And hullin which were slaughtered in the Temple court. 
Shimon says: hullin which were slaughtered in the Temple court must be burned.   
And similarly a wild animal killed in the Temple court [is also burned]. 

Explanation
Section one: The aborted fetus carries the holiness of its mother, but it can’t be redeemed. Therefore it must be buried. The same is true with regard to the placenta mentioned in the next section. The placenta here refers to an early miscarriage which might have a fetus in it, and therefore it too must be buried.  
Section three: An ox which committed a crime (murder or sex with a human being) must be stoned. Once it is stoned, it is forbidden to derive benefit from it (see Exodus 21:28). The same is true with regard to the heifer whose neck is broken as part of the ritual that atones for an unknown murder. See Deuteronomy 21; Mishnah Kiddushin 2:9 and Avodah Zarah 5:9.
Section five: There are two birds used in the purification of the leper (see Leviticus 14). One bird is slaughtered and the other bird is set free. It is forbidden to use these birds for any other purpose. The slaughtered bird must be buried, and if it should die before being released, the other bird must be buried as well. However, once the other bird is released, it is permitted.
Section six: It is forbidden to derive any benefit from the hair that the nazirite shaves during the ritual which observed if he became impure (see Numbers 6:9). However, the hair that he shaves at the end of his term of naziriteship is burned (see vs. 18). 
Section seven:  The first born of a donkey must be redeemed with a sheep. It is prohibited to derive any benefit from the sheep after it has been used to redeem the donkey. 
Section eight: It is prohibited to derive benefit from milk and meat cooked together. If one does cook them together they must be buried, which basically means that the mixture must be thrown away. 
Section nine: According to the first opinion, if a non-sacred animal is slaughtered in the Temple court, it must be buried. Rabbi Shimon says that it must be burned, which is the same rule that applies to sanctified animals that become disqualified in the Temple court (see mishnah six below). He holds that all animals that are improperly slaughtered in the Temple court must be burned—this is to prevent confusion.  Indeed, Rabbi Shimon holds that even though wild animals cannot be sacrificed they too must be burned. 
  
  
