Temurah, Chapter Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah compares the laws of sacrifices brought by an individual with the laws of sacrifices brought by the congregation.

Mishnah One
There are [laws relating] to the sacrifices of an individual which do not apply to congregational sacrifices and [laws relating] to congregational sacrifices which do not apply to the sacrifices of individuals. 
For sacrifices of an individual can make a substitute whereas congregational sacrifices cannot make a substitute; 
Sacrifices of an individual can be either males or females, whereas congregational sacrifices can be only males.
For sacrifices of an individual the owner is responsible for them and their libations, whereas for congregational sacrifices they are not liable for them or for their libations, although they are liable for their libations once the sacrifice has been offered.  
There are [laws relating] to congregational sacrifices which do not apply to the sacrifices of individuals:
For congregational sacrifices override Shabbat and [the laws] of ritual impurity, whereas sacrifices of individuals do not override the Shabbat or [the laws] of ritual impurity. 
Rabbi Meir said: but do not the griddle cakes of a high priest and the bull for Yom Hakippurim  which are sacrifices of individuals and yet override the Shabbat and [the laws] of ritual impurity? The matter therefore depends on [whether] the time [for the offering up] is fixed.

Explanation
Section one: There are three ways in which sacrifices brought by an individual differ from the public sacrifices brought by the congregation.
First of all, as we learned in yesterday’s mishnah, sacrifices brought by an individual can make substitutes whereas those brought by the congregation do not.
Second, sacrifices brought by the congregation must always be brought from male animals.
Third, if an individual is obligated to bring a sacrifice within a certain time, and the time passes, he must still bring the sacrifice and all of its libations (wine and oil). In contrast, if a congregational sacrifice, such as a tamid (daily) or musaf (additional) offering is not brought at its correct time, the congregation need not bring it later, nor need they bring its libations at a later time. The one caveat is that if the offering was sacrificed at the correct time and the congregation for some reason did not bring its libations, they must do so at a later date. 
Section two: Congregational sacrifices can be brought on Shabbat and if there are no ritually clean priests, even impure priests can bring them. However, individual sacrifices are never offered on Shabbat and if there are no pure priests to offer them, they simply must wait until a priest is purified.
While the first opinion seems to hold that the reason for this difference between congregational and individual sacrifices is that the former is brought by the many and the latter is not, Rabbi Meir points out that there are two individual sacrifices that do not conform to these rules. The griddle cakes that the priest offers on a daily basis (see Menahot 4:5) and the bull he offers on Yom Kippur (Leviticus 16:7) are both individual sacrifices and yet they both override the Shabbat and the laws of impurity. Rabbi Meir explains that the reason a sacrifice overrides Shabbat and the impurity laws is that its time is fixed. Congregational sacrifices and a couple of individual sacrifices have fixed times, whereas other individual sacrifices do not. That is why they do not override the Shabbat or impurity laws. 

