Temurah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Today’s mishnah is a direct continuation of yesterday’s mishnah.

Mishnah Four
But cannot a nedavah [freewill-offering] also be an olah? What then is the difference between the opinion of Rabbi Elazar and that of the sages?   
Only in that when the offering comes as an obligation, he lays his hands on it and he brings libations and the libations must be from him; and if he is a priest, the privilege of officiating and its hide belong to him.
Whereas when he brings it as a freewill-offering, he does not lay his hands [on it], he does not bring libations with it, the libations are provided by the congregation, and although he is a priest, the privilege of officiating and its hide belong to the men of the division [officiating that particular week].

Explanation
Section one: In the last two sections of yesterday’s mishnah Rabbi Elazar and the sages argued what to do with the proceeds from the sale of an asham that couldn’t have been sacrificed. Rabbi Elazar said they would buy an olah, and the sages said that the money would go into the treasury of funds used to buy freewill offerings. The problem is that the money from this fund would be used to buy olot, which can be brought as freewill offerings. So what is the difference between Rabbi Elazar’s opinion and that of the sages?
Section two: The difference is that when an individual brings the olah, as Rabbi Elazar stated, he must lay his hands upon the sacrifice, he is responsible for the libations (wine, grain and oil) and if he is a priest, he gets to sacrifice it, and he keeps its hide, as the officiating priest always does with an olah. 
Section three: However, if it is brought from the funds for freewill offerings, then it is a communal sacrifice. He does not lay his hands on it, the libations come from communal funds and even if he is a priest, he does not get to sacrifice it himself. Rather the duty falls to whatever division of priests is serving in the Temple that week, and they receive the hide. 

