Temurah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
If one set aside a female animal for an olah and it gave birth to a male, it goes out to pasture until it becomes unfit for sacrifice. It is then sold and with its money he brings an olah. 
Rabbi Elazar says: the [male] animal itself is offered as an olah.
If one sets aside a female [animal] for an asham, it goes out to pasture until it becomes unfit for sacrifice. It is then sold and with its money he brings an asham. 
If he has already offered an asham [in its place], its money goes for freewill-offerings.
Rabbi Shimon says: it is sold without [waiting for] a blemish.  
The substitute of an asham, the young of its substitute, their young and the young of their young until the end of time, go out to pasture until unfit for sacrifice. They are then sold and their money goes for a freewill-offering.  
Rabbi Eliezer says: they are left to die.
Rabbi Elazar says: he brings olot [burnt sacrifices] with their money. 
An asham whose owner died or whose owner obtained atonement [through another animal] goes out to pasture until unfit for sacrifice. It is then sold and its money goes for freewill-offerings. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: they are left to die.
Rabbi Elazar says: he brings olot [burnt sacrifices] with their money.

Explanation
Section one: An olah must be a male animal. If one sets aside a female animal to be an olah, he has sanctified it, but it cannot be offered up in the manner he wished. To solve this problem, we let the animal go out to pasture until it is blemished. Once it is blemished it can be sold, because it can no longer be sacrificed. Our mishnah points out that if the female animal has male offspring, the same process is undergone by that animal. We can’t sacrifice it because its sanctity came from its mother and its mother was improperly dedicated to be an olah. In both cases the profits from the sale go towards buying another olah.
Rabbi Elazar disagrees and holds that the male offspring can be offered as an olah, even though its mother could not.
Section two: The asham (a guilt-offering) must also be male. The same solution is employed as was used above.
There is an additional issue with the asham. If before he buys the new asham he brings another animal through which he atones for his guilt, then he can’t use the proceeds from the blemished asham to buy a new asham, because one can’t bring two ashamot for one sin. In this case, the proceeds go to a fund that is used to buy freewill offerings.
Rabbi Shimon says that they can sell the original asham without even waiting for it to be blemished. In his opinion, the fact that it can’t be sacrificed as an asham already is a blemish, and we need not wait for another one. 
Section three: As stated above, one can’t bring two ashamot for one sin. So while an asham can make a substitute, the substitute cannot be offered as an asham. Neither can the offspring or any subsequent offspring of the substitute or the asham. According to the first opinion, all of these animals must go out to pasture, become blemished and then sold for money to be used for freewill offerings. Rabbi Eliezer says that these animals must be left to die, just as they are in the case of a hatat (see 2:2; we will learn more about the hatat in the next mishnah). Rabbi Elazar says that he can bring olot (burnt offerings) with the proceeds. His opinion will be explained in tomorrow’s mishnah.
Section four: If the asham itself cannot be sacrificed because either its owner died or he already achieved atonement through another animal, then the same debate about what to do with the proceeds of its sale occurs as we saw in section three above.  
