Temurah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with various scenarios where one sets aside a hatat or money for a hatat and it or the money is lost, and then he sets aside another hatat or more money to buy another hatat and he then finds the first one before he offers the second one.

Mishnah Three
If one set aside money for his hatat, and it was lost and he set aside other money in its place, if he did not have the opportunity to buy a hatat with it until the [first] money was found, he brings a hatat from both [sums], and the rest of the money is used for a freewill-offering.
If one set aside money for his hatat and it was lost and he set aside a hatat in its place, if he did not have the opportunity to offer it until the money was found, and the hatat was blemished, it is sold and he brings a hatat from both [sums], and the rest is used as a freewill-offering. 
If one set aside a hatat and it was lost and he set aside money in its place, if he did not have the opportunity to buy a hatat until his hatat was found and it was blemished, it is sold and he brings a hatat from both [sums], and the rest is used for a freewill-offering. 
If one set aside a hatat and it was lost and he set aside another hatat in its place, if he did not have the opportunity to offer it until the first hatat was found and both were blemished, they are to be sold and he brings a hatat from both [sums] and the rest is used for a freewill-offering. 
If one set aside a hatat and it was lost and he set aside another in its place, if he did not have the opportunity of offering it until the first hatat was found and both animals were unblemished, one of them is offered as a hatat and the second must be left to die, the words of Rabbi. 
The sages say: the only hatat which is left to die is a case where it is found after the owners obtained atonement, and the money does not go to the Dead Sea except where found after the owners have obtained atonement.

Explanation
Section one: This case, and all of the cases in this mishnah, differ from those in yesterday’s mishnah because in these cases the original money or hatat is found before a replacement hatat is offered. In this first section, both sets of money must be used to buy a hatat. They are mixed in together to buy one hatat through which the owner receives atonement and any extra money goes to a fund for freewill offerings.
Section two: In this case, the second hatat is blemished so it can be sold. If it had been unblemished, it could have been sacrificed (as we shall see in section five). Here, since it is blemished it is sold and again, both sums are used to buy one hatat and the extra goes for freewill offerings.
Section three: This is similar to the situation in section two, except here he originally set aside a hatat and then set aside money. Again, since the hatat is blemished, it can be sold and both sums are used to buy one hatat.
Section four:  Again, a very similar scenario, except this time both animals were set aside (and not just money for animals). Since both are blemished, the same procedure as above is followed. 
Section five: Ah! Finally a debate! In this case both the original hatat and the replacement hatat are unblemished. According, to Rabbi [Judah HaNasi] one of the two hataot has to be left to die, and the other one can be sacrificed.
The rabbis disagree. Since the first hatat wasn’t yet sacrificed, neither of them needs to be left to die. The only type of hatat that is lost that needs to be left to die is one where the replacement hatat was sacrificed. Here, since the replacement wasn’t yet sacrificed, both can go out to pasture until they are blemished. The rabbis also add in that the only case where the money must be thrown into the Dead Sea is the case that we discussed in yesterday’s mishnah—the replacement hatat was sacrificed. If the replacement hatat was not sacrificed then the hatat is left to become blemished and then both sums are used to buy a new hatat.  
