The issue of all animals which are disqualified for the altar are legitimate for the altar. R. Eleazar says: the issue of a trefah however may not be offered on the altar.   R. Hanina b. Antigonus says: a ritually clean animal which suckled from a trefah is disqualified from the altar. One may not redeem any dedicated animal which became trefah, since we are not allowed to redeem dedicated [animals] in order to give them to dogs to eat.  
Mishnah. There are [regulations] which apply to dedications for the altar   which do not apply to dedications   for repairs of the temple, and there are [regulations] which apply to dedications for the repairs of the temple which do not apply to dedications for the altar. For dedications for the altar effect exchange, they are subject to the laws of piggul,   nothar   and ritual uncleanness;
Their issue and milk are forbidden  after their redemption;  if one kills them without [the temple court] he is guilty [of a transgression]  and wages are not paid from them  to artisans,  which is not the case with dedications for temple repairs. There are [regulations] which apply to dedications for the repairs of the temple [which are not found elsewhere], since unspecified dedications  go to the repairs of the temple, dedication for the repairs of the temple takes effect on all things,  the law of sacrilege  applies to their products,  and there is no benefit to be derived from them for the priest.  
Mishnah. Neither dedications for the altar nor dedications for the repairs of the temple may be changed from one holiness to another.  We may dedicate them  with a value-dedicatlon,  and we may declare them herem.  If they  die,  they are buried.  R.  Shimon says: dedications for the repairs of the temple, if they died, they are redeemed. 
	mishnah. And the following are the things which are to be buried:   if a dedicated animal had an untimely birth it is to be buried;   if a dedicated animal had an afterbirth it   is to be buried.   An ox which was condemned to be stoned;   the heifer whose neck was broken; the birds [brought in connection with the purification] of a leper;   the hair of a nazirite;   the firstbirth of an ass;   [a mixture of] meat and milk; and hullin which were killed in the temple court. R.  Shimon however says: hullin which were killed in the temple court are to be burnt.   And likewise [says r.  Shimon] an animal of chase which was killed in the temple court [is also burnt].   And the following are to be burnt: leavened bread on passover is to be burnt; unclean terumah; ‘orlah;   mixed seeds in the vineyard;   that   which it is customary to burn   is to be burnt and that which it is customary to bury   is to be buried. We may burn   the bread and oil of [unclean] terumah.   All dedicated animals which were killed [with the intention of being eaten] beyond the allotted time or beyond the allotted place   are to be burnt.
A guilt-offering offered by one in doubt [as to whether he has committed a sinful act] is to be burnt.  R. Judah, however, says: it is to be buried. A sin-offering of a bird that is brought for a doubt  is burnt.  R. Judah, however, says: it is cast into the sewer.  All things requiring to be buried must not be burnt, and all things which require to be burnt must not be buried.  R. Judah says: if one wishes to be stringent with himself, to burn things which are buried, he is permitted to do so. They said to him: it is not allowed to change.

