Introduction

Tractate Zevahim is the first tractate in Seder Kodashim, most of which deals with sacrificial laws and other various laws governing the Temple. Zevahim deals with animal and bird sacrifices, with what disqualifies them and what happens when they are sacrificed outside of the Temple. 
There are seven types of sacrifices which I shall list here. Some offerings are mandatory and some are voluntary, some are communal and some are individual, and both of these distinctions are critical.
Below I will list them by their Hebrew name and by an attempt at translating that name into English. However, throughout my translation and commentary I will refer to them mostly by their Hebrew name, in order to encourage the reader to learn them in a version closer to the original. 
1. Olah, the wholly burnt offering. This is also sometimes called a “holocaust” but for obvious reasons, I won’t be using that translation. The olah can either be a mandatory offering, such as the tamid, the daily sacrifices (Numbers 28:1-8) or the musaf, additional offering (Numbers 28: 9ff) or a voluntary offering (Leviticus 1). There are many other mandatory types of the olah. The olah is sometimes a beast and sometimes a bird.
2. Hatat, the sin offering, also sometimes translated as a cleansing offering. The main type of hatat is one that is brought to atone for an unintentional sin (Leviticus 4:1-5). There are also hataot (the plural of hatat) brought on the festivals (Numbers 28: 15ff). There are several other types of hataot as well.  The hatat is sometimes a beast and sometimes a bird.
3. Asham, guilt offering. This is brought by robbers, people who made illicit use of Temple property, and by several others (Leviticus 5:14-26; 19:20-22). 
The asham, the hatat and the olah are all considered “holy of holies” which means that they are eaten entirely by priests within the Temple confines. 
4. Shelamim, well-being or peace offering. This is generally an individual offering, either voluntary or mandated, with the exception of the two lambs brought on Shavuot (Leviticus 23:19) which are a communal offering. The todah, or thanksgiving offering, is considered a type of shelamim (Leviticus 7:11ff). 
5. Bechor, the first-born animal. There is an entire tractate devoted to the bechor, so we will deal with it there.
6. Maaser behemah, the animal tithe (Leviticus 27:32).  This subject is also covered in Tractate Bechorot.
7. Pesah, the passover lamb. This sacrifice is covered in Tractate Pesahim.

There are four steps that are essential and are covered extensively concerning in the sacrifice of a beast: 1) the slaughter (shechitah); 2) collecting the blood from the animal’s neck in a vessel; 3) bringing the blood to the altar; 4) spilling the blood on the altar. When it comes to the slaughter of the bird sacrifices that are two main steps: 1) the plucking off of its head (melikah); 2) the squeezing out of its blood. 

These main steps must be performed with the proper intent and when they are not the sacrifice is disqualified. Thus a large portion of Zevahim deals with intent. The main issues of intent are that the priest must have the intent to eat the sacrifice within the time allotted to eat that sacrifice, and to eat the sacrifice in a place where that sacrifice can be eaten. An animal that is sacrificed with improper intent is called “piggul” a word used in Leviticus 7:18. 
The fascination the rabbis had with “intent” of the priest offering sacrifices offers an interesting window to the difference between the rabbis’ canonization of the Temple laws and those found in Leviticus, the priestly source of these laws. Leviticus is mostly concerned with the minutiae of how the sacrifices are performed, how they are slaughtered, where they are slaughtered, what is done with the blood, the other remains, who eats them, etc. It is a very practical guide for priests and would have served as sort of a handbook for priests concerning what to do in the Temple.
The rabbis’ discussion of these laws is very different. There are practical issues here, but I don’t believe that a priest could pick up Tractate Zevahim or other tractates in Seder Kodashim and know what to do in the Temple. Rather, we have here the rabbis discussing how something that was very important in their worldview, namely “kavvanah” or inner-intention and focus, impacts upon external activities, such as offering a sacrifice. It is my opinion that Tractate Zevahim, in large, supplies the background to prayer, which is in truth an inner activity and not an external one. In other words, part of the reason that the rabbis engaged in so much discussion concerning sacrificial law, laws which were not practiced during their time, is that this was an opportunity for them to understand the Torah’s many performance laws in accord with their own intense interest in kavvanah. That is not to say that some rabbis didn’t want and expect a rebuilding of the Temple. That might also be an issue in this tractate and seder but I don’t believe it is the sole or main fuel for much of these discussions.
In any case, enough of me talking and let’s get learning. When we’re done with learning this tractate, one which will probably strike you as different from all that you’ve already learned, then you can tell me why you think the rabbis seem to have been so fascinated by the internal intent of the priest offering the sacrifice.  

