Ll  minhahs,  from which the handful was taken under any other name than their own,  are valid, save that they do not discharge the obligation of the owner,  with the exception of the sinner's  minhah  and the  minhah of jealousy.  As to the sinner's  minhah and the  minhah of jealousy, if the handful was taken therefrom under any other name than their own, or if they were put into the vessel, or brought nigh, or burnt under any other name than their own, or under their own and another name, or under another name and their own, they are invalid. How can they be ‘under their own and another name’? If offered as a sinner's  minhah and as a freewill  minhah. And how can they be under another name and their own’? If offered as a freewill  minhah and as a sinner's  minhah.
Mishnah. Whether it is a sinner's  minhah or any other  minhah, if a non-priest, or [a priest] that was in mourning.   Or had immersed himself during the day.   Or was not wearing the [official priestly] robes,   or whose atonement was not yet complete.   Or that had not washed his hands and feet,   or that was uncircumcised   or unclean, or that ministered sitting,   or standing upon vessels or upon a beast or upon another's feet,   had taken the handful therefrom it is invalid. If [a priest] removed the handful with his left hand it is invalid. Ben bathyra says, he must put [the handful] back and take it out again with the right hand. If on taking the handful there came into his hand a small stone or a grain of salt or a drop of frankincense it is invalid;   for they have ruled: if the handful was too much or too little it is invalid. What is meant by too much? If he took an overflowing handful. And ‘too little’? If he took the handful with the tips of his fingers only.  
Mishnah. How should he do it? He should stretch out his fingers on to the palm of his hand. If he put in too much of its oil or too little of its oil.   Or too little of its frankincense,   the offering is invalid.

If he took the handful   from the  minhah [intending] to eat the remainder outside [the temple court] or an olive's bulk of the remainder outside, or to burn   the handful outside or an olive's bulk of the handful outside, or to burn its frankincense outside, the offering is invalid, but the penalty of kareth   is not incurred.   [if he intended] to eat the remainder on the morrow   or an olive's bulk of the remainder on the morrow, or to burn the handful on the morrow or an olive's bulk of the handful on the morrow, or to burn its frankincense on the morrow,
The offering is piggul,  and the penalty of kareth is incurred. This is the general rule: if one took the handful or put it into the vessel or brought it nigh or burnt it, [intending] to eat a thing that is usual to eat or to burn a thing that is usual to burn, outside its proper place, the offering is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred; but if [he intended the like] outside its proper time, the offering is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred; provided that the mattir  was offered according to its prescribed rite.  How is the mattir offered according to its prescribed rite? If he took out the handful in silence, but put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it [intending at each service to eat the remainder] outside its proper time; or if he took out the handful [intending to eat the remainder] outside its proper time, but put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it in silence; or if he took out the handful and put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it [intending at each service to eat the remainder] outside its proper time — such is a case where the mattir is offered according to its prescribed rite.  How is the mattir offered not according to its prescribed rite? If he took out the handful [intending to eat the remainder] outside its proper place, and put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it [intending at each service to eat the remainder] outside its proper time; or if he took out the handful [intending to eat the remainder] outside its proper time, and he put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it [intending at each service to eat the remainder] outside its proper place; or if he took out the handful and put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it [intending at these services to eat the remainder] outside its proper place  — (such is a case where the mattir is offered not according to its rite).  Or if it was a sinner's  minhah  or a  minhah of jealousy.  And he took the handful therefrom under any name other than its own, and put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it [intending at each service to eat the remainder] outside its proper time; or if he took out the handful [intending to eat the remainder] outside its proper time, and put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it under any name other than its own; or if he took out the handful and put it into the vessel and brought it nigh and burnt it under any name other than its own — such is a case where the mattir is offered not according to its prescribed rite.
[if he intended]  to eat an olive's bulk of the remainder outside its proper place and another olive's bulk thereof on the morrow, or to eat an olive's bulk thereof on the morrow and another olive's bulk thereof outside its proper place, or to eat a half-olive's bulk thereof outside its proper place and a half-olive's bulk on the morrow,  or to eat a half-olive's bulk thereof on the morrow and an half-olive's bulk outside its proper place,  the offering is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred.  Rabbi judah said, this is the general rule: if the intention about the time preceded the intention about the place, the offering is piggul   and the penalty of kareth is incurred; but if the intention about the place preceded the intention about the time, the offering is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred.   But the sages say, in both cases the offering is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred.
Mishnah. [if he intended] to eat a half-olive's bulk and to burn a half-olive's bulk,   the offering is valid, for eating and burning cannot be reckoned together.
Mishnah. If he took out the handful [intending] to eat the remainder or to burn the handful on the morrow, in this case r. Jose agrees that the offering is piggul  and that the penalty of kareth  is incurred on account thereof.  [if he intended] to burn the frankincense thereof on the morrow, r. Jose says, it is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred on account thereof; but the sages say, it is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account thereof. They said to him, how does this differ from an animal-offering?  He said to them, with the animal-offering the blood, the flesh and the sacrificial portions are all one;  but the frankincense is not of the  minhah.
Mishnah. If he slaughtered the two lambs   [intending] to eat one of the [two] loaves on the morrow, or if he burnt the two dishes [of the frankincense intending] to eat one of the [two] rows of the showbread   on the morrow, r. Jose says, that loaf or that row about which he expressed the intention is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account of them, while the other is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred. But the sages say, both are piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account of them.
Mishnah. If he slaughtered the two lambs   [intending] to eat one of the [two] loaves on the morrow, or if he burnt the two dishes [of the frankincense intending] to eat one of the [two] rows of the showbread   on the morrow, r. Jose says, that loaf or that row about which he expressed the intention is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account of them, while the other is invalid but the penalty of kareth is not incurred. But the sages say, both are piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account of them.
	mishnah. If one of the [two] loaves   or one of the [two] rows [of the showbread] became unclean, r. Judah says, both must be taken out to the place of burning, for the offering of the congregation may not be divided.   But the sages say, the unclean [is treated] as unclean, but the clean may be eaten.
Mishnah. The thank-offering  can render the bread piggul but the bread cannot render the thank-offering piggul. Thus, if he slaughtered the thank-offering intending to eat a part thereof on the morrow, both it and the bread are piggul; if he intended to eat of the bread on the morrow, the bread is piggul but the thank-offering is not piggul.

   	the lambs  can render the bread piggul but the bread cannot render the lambs piggul. Thus, if he slaughtered the lambs intending to eat a part thereof on the morrow, both they and the bread are piggul if he intended to eat of the bread on the morrow, the bread is piggul but the lambs are not.
Mishnah. The animal-offering can render the drink-offerings piggul   after they have been hallowed in the vessel. So r. Meir. But the drink-offerings cannot render the animal-offering piggul. Thus, if he slaughtered an animal-offering intending to eat thereof on the morrow, both it and the drink-offerings are piggul; if he intended to offer the drink-offerings on the morrow, the drink-offerings are piggul but the animal-offering is not.
Mishnah. If he expressed an intention which makes piggul [in respect of the remainder] during the [burning of the] handful and not during the [burning of the] frankincense, or during the [burning of the] frankincense and not during the [burning of the] incense, r. Meir says, it is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account thereof; but the sages say, the penalty of kareth is not incurred unless he expressed the intention which makes piggul during the service of the whole of the mattir.  The sages, however, agree with r. Meir that, if it was a sinners  minhah  or a  minhah of jealousy,  and he expressed an intention which makes piggul during the [burning of the] handful, it is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account thereof, since the handful is the entire mattir. If he slaughtered one of the lambs  intending to eat the two loaves on the morrow, or if he burnt one of the dishes of frankincense  intending to eat the two rows [of the showbread] on the morrow, r. Meir says, it is piggul and the penalty of kareth is incurred on account thereof; but the sages say, the penalty of kareth is not incurred unless he expressed the intention which makes piggul during the service of the whole of the mattir. If he slaughtered one of the lambs intending to eat a part of it on the morrow, that [lamb] is piggul but the other [lamb] is valid; if he intended to eat of the other [lamb] on the morrow, both are valid.
	mishnah. If he took the handful from the  minhah intending to eat   a thing that it is not usual to eat   or to burn   a thing that it is not usual to burn,   the offering is valid; but r. Eliezer declares it to be invalid. If he intended to eat   less than an olive's bulk of a thing that it is usual to eat, or to burn   less than an olive's bulk of a thing that it is usual to burn, the offering is valid. If he intended to eat   a half-olive's bulk and to burn   a half-olive's bulk, the offering is valid, for eating and burning cannot be reckoned together.
Mishnah. If he did not pour in [the oil],   or if he did not mingle it, or if he did not break up [the  minhah] in pieces,   or if he did not salt it,   or wave it,   or bring it nigh,   or if he broke it up into large pieces,   or did not anoint it   [with oil], it is valid.
Mishnah. If the handful of one  minhah was mixed with the handful of another, or with a priest's  minhah,   or with the  minhah of the anointed [high] priest,   or with the  minhah offered with the drink-offerings,   it   is valid.  Rabbi Judah says, if [it was mixed] with the  minhah of the anointed [high] priest or with the  minhah offered with the drink-offerings, it is invalid, for since the consistency of the one   is thick and the consistency of the other   is thin, each absorbs from the other.  
Mishnah. If two  minhahs from which the handfuls had not yet been taken were mixed together, but it is still possible to take the handful from each separately,   they are valid; otherwise they are invalid. If the handful [of a  minhah] was mixed with a  minhah from which the handful had not yet been taken, it   must not be offered. If, however, it was offered, then the  minhah from which the handful had been taken discharges the owner's obligation whilst the other from which the handful had not been taken does not discharge the owner's obligation. If the handful was mixed with the remainder of the  minhah or with the remainder of another  minhah, it must not be offered; but if it was offered it discharges the owner's obligation.
Mishnah. If the handful had become unclean and yet was offered, the plate  renders it acceptable,  but if it had been taken out [of the temple court] and was afterwards offered, the plate does not render it acceptable; for the plate only renders acceptable the offering which was unclean but not that which was taken out.
	mishnah. If the remainder of the  minhah became unclean or was burnt or lost, according to the rule of r. Eliezer  it is lawful [to burn the handful], but according to the rule of r. Joshua  it is unlawful.
Mishnah. If [he did] not [put the handful] into a vessel of ministry   it is invalid; but r.  Shimon declares it valid, if he burnt the handful twice,   it is valid.
Mishnah. Of the handful the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole.  Of the tenth  the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole. Of the wine  the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole. Of the oil  the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole. Of the fine flour and the oil the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the handful and the frankincense the [absence of] one invalidates the other.
Mishnah. Of the two he-goats   of the day of atonement the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the two lambs   of the feast of weeks the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the two loaves   the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the two rows   [of the showbread] the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the two dishes   [of frankincense] the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the rows and the dishes the [absence of] one invalidates the other. Of the two kinds [of cakes] used in the offering of the nazirite,   of the three kinds used for the red cow,   of the four kinds [of cakes] used in the thank-offering,   of the four kinds [of plants] used for the lulab,   and of the four kinds used for the [purification of the] leper,   the [absence of] one invalidates the others. Of the seven sprinklings [of the blood] of the red cow   the [omission of] one invalidates the others. Of the seven sprinklings between the staves of the ark,   and of those towards the veil and upon the golden altar,   the [omission of] one invalidates the others.
Mishnah. Of the seven branches of the candlestick,  the [absence of] one invalidates the others. Of the seven lamps thereof, the [absence of] one invalidates the others. Of the two portions of scripture in the mezuzah,   the [absence of] one invalidates the other; indeed even one [imperfect] letter can invalidate the whole. Of the four portions of scripture in the tefillin,   the [absence of] one invalidates the others; indeed even one [imperfect] letter can invalidate the whole. Of the four fringes,   the [absence of] one invalidates the others, since the four together form one precept.  Rabbi Ishmael says, the four are four separate precepts.
Mishnah. The [absence of the] blue [in the fringes] does not invalidate the white, neither does the [absence of the] white invalidate the blue  the [absence of the] hand-tefillah does not invalidate the head-tefillah, neither does the [absence of the] head-tefillah invalidate the hand-teflllah. 
	mishnah. The [absence of the] fine flour and the oil does not invalidate the wine,  neither does the [absence of the] wine invalidate them. The [omission of one of the] sprinklings [of the blood] on the outer altar does not invalidate the rest. 
Mishnah. The [absence of either the] bullocks or the rams or the lambs does not invalidate the others.    Rabbi  Shimon said, if they had [means enough for the] many bullocks but had not [means enough for] the drink-offerings, they should bring one bullock and its drink-offerings and should not offer them all without drink-offerings.
Mishnah. The [absence of the] bullock,  or the rams, or the lambs or the he-goat does not invalidate the   bread-offering,  neither does the [absence of the] bread-offering invalidate them. The [absence of the] bread-offering invalidates the lambs,  but the [absence of the] lambs does not invalidate the bread-offering. So r. Akiba.  Rabbi  Shimon b. Nanos said, it is not so, but rather the [absence of the] lambs invalidates the bread-offering, whilst the [absence of the] bread-offering does not invalidate the lambs; for so we find it was the case that when the israelites were in the wilderness for forty years they offered the lambs without the bread-offering;  therefore now too they may offer the lambs without the bread-offering.  Rabbi  Shimon said, the halachah is according to the words of ben nanos but the reason is not as he stated it; for every offering stated in the book of numbers was offered in the wilderness, but not every offering stated in the book of leviticus was offered in the wilderness; however, when they came into the land of israel they offered both kinds. Why then do i say that the lambs may be offered without the bread-offering? Because the lambs render themselves permissible.  And [why do i say that] the bread-offering may not be offered without the lambs? Because there is nothing that renders it permissible. 
Mishnah. The [absence of the] daily offerings does not invalidate the additional offerings,   neither does [the absence of] the additional offerings invalidate the daily offerings; moreover of the additional offerings the [absence of] one does not invalidate the other. Even though they   did not offer the lamb   in the morning they must offer [the lamb] towards evening.    Rabbi  Shimon said, when is this? Only when they had acted under constraint or in error, but if they acted deliberately and did not offer the lamb in the morning they may not offer [the lamb] towards evening. If they did not burn the incense in the morning   they burn it towards evening.  Rabbi  Shimon said, the whole of it was burnt towards evening,   for the golden altar was dedicated only by the incense of spices,   the altar for the burnt-offering only by the daily offering of the morning, the table only by the showbread on the sabbath, and the candlestick only by [the kindling of] seven lamps towards evening.
	mishnah. The high priest's griddle-cakes  must not be brought in [two separate] halves, but he must bring a whole tenth and then divide it, offering a half in the morning and a half towards evening. If the [high] priest that offered the half in the morning died and they appointed another priest in his stead, [the successor] may not bring a half-tenth from his house, neither [may he use] the remaining half-tenth of the first [high priest], but he must bring a whole tenth and divide it, offering one half and leaving the other half to perish. Thus the result is that two halves are offered and two halves are left to perish. 
	mishnah. If they did not appoint another priest in his stead, at whose expense was it  offered?  Rabbi  Shimon says, at the expense of the community; but r. Judah says, at the expense of the heirs; moreover a whole [tenth] was offered. 
Mishnah. All  minhahs must be offered unleavened, with the exception of the leavened cakes of the thank-offering   and the two loaves [of pentecost].   Which are offered leavened.  Rabbi Meir says, the leaven must be taken from [the  minhahs] themselves and with this they are leavened.    Rabbi Judah says, that is not the best way,   but [first of all] leaven must be brought and put into the measuring vessel and then the measuring vessel is filled up [with flour]. But they said to him, even so [it is not satisfactory]; for it would be sometimes too little and sometimes too much.  
Mishnah. All  minhahs must be kneaded with lukewarm water and must be watched lest they become leavened. If one allowed the remainder  to become leavened one transgresses a prohibition, for it is written, no  minhah which ye shall bring unto the lord shall be made leavened.   One is liable for the kneading as well as for the shaping and for the baking.
Mishnah. Some [ minhahs] require oil and frankincense, some require oil but not frankincense, some frankincense but not oil, and some neither oil nor frankincense. These require oil and frankincense: the  minhah of fine flour,  that prepared on a griddle, that prepared in a pan, the cakes and the wafers,  the  minhah of the priests, the  minhah of the anointed high priest,  the  minhah of a gentile,  the  minhah of women,  and the  minhah of the ‘omer.  The  minhah offered with the drink-offerings  requires oil but not frankincense. The showbread requires frankincense but not oil. The two loaves,  the sinner's  minhah  and the  minhah of jealousy   require neither oil nor frankincense.
Mishnah. [a man is] liable because of the oil by itself and because of the frankincense by itself.  If he put in oil, he has rendered it invalid, but if frankincense, he must pick it off again. If he put oil on the remainder, he has not thereby transgressed a negative precept. If he put one vessel above the other vessel,  he has not thereby rendered it invalid.
Mishnah. Some [ minhahs] require bringing near  but not waving,  some require bringing near and also waving, some require waving but not bringing near, and some require neither bringing near nor waving. These require bringing near but not waving: the  minhah of fine flour,  that prepared on a griddle, that prepared in a pan, the cakes and the wafers, the  minhah of the priests, the  minhah of the anointed high priest, the  minhah of a gentile, the  minhah of women, and the sinner's  minhah.  Rabbi  Shimon says, the  minhah of the priests and the  minhah of the anointed high priest do not require bringing near, since no handful is taken out of them, and where no handful is taken out bringing near is not necessary.
Mishnah. These require waving but not bringing near: the log of oil of the leper and his guilt-offering,  the firstfruits according to r. Eliezer b. Jacob, the sacrificial portions of an individual's peace-offerings and the breast and thigh thereof, whether they are the offerings of men or of women, by israelites but not by others;  the two loaves and the two lambs of pentecost. How is it performed? He places the two loaves upon the two lambs and puts his two hands beneath them and waves them forward and backward and upward and downward, for it is written, which is waved and which is heaved up.  The waving was performed on the east side  [of the altar] and the bringing near on the west side. The ceremony of waving comes before that of bringing near.   The  minhah of the ‘omer and the  minhah of jealousy require bringing near and waving. The showbread and the  minhah with the drink-offerings require neither bringing near nor waving.

   	r.  Shimon says, there are three kinds of offering which [between them] require three rites; two [of the three rites] apply to each kind of offering, but the three are with none. And these are they: the peace-offering of the individual, the peace-offering of the community   and the guilt-offering of the leper. The peace-offering of the individual requires the laying on of hands for the living animal and waving   after it is slaughtered, but it does not require waving for the living animal. The peace-offering of the community requires waving for the living animal and also after it is slaughtered, but it does not require the laying on of hands. The guilt-offering of the leper requires the laying on of hands and also waving for the living animal, but it does not require waving after it is slaughtered.
Mishnah. If a man said, ‘i take upon myself [to offer a  minhah] prepared on a griddle’, he must not bring one prepared in a pan; if ‘in a pan’, he must not bring one prepared on a griddle. What is the difference between a griddle [mahabath]  and a pan [marhesheth]?  The pan has a lid to it, but the griddle has no lid. So r. Jose the galilean.  Rabbi Hanina b. Gamaliel says, a pan is deep and what is prepared therein is spongy,  a griddle is flat and what is prepared thereon is hard.
	mishnah. [if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself [to offer a  minhah baked] in an oven’, he must not bring what is baked in a stove   or on tiles or in the fireplace of the arabs.    Rabbi Judah says, if he so wishes he may bring what is baked in a stove. [if he said,] i take upon myself [to offer] a baked  minhah’, he may not bring half in cakes and half in wafers.    Rabbi  Shimon permits it since both kinds belong to the same offering.
	mishnah.  Rabbi Ishmael says, on the sabbath   the omer   was taken out   of three se'ahs   [of barley]. And on a weekday out of five. But the sages say, whether on the sabbath or on a weekday it was taken out of three se'ahs.  Rabbi Hanina the vice-high priest   says, on the sabbath it was reaped by one man with one sickle into one basket, and on a weekday it was reaped by three men into three baskets and with three sickles. But the sages say, whether on the sabbath or on a weekday it was reaped by three men into three baskets and with three sickles.  
Mishnah. The precept of the ‘omer is that it should be brought from [what grows] near by. If [the crop] near jerusalem was not yet ripe, it could be brought from any place. It once happened that the omer was brought from gaggoth zerifin  and the two loaves from the plain of en soker. 
Mishnah. What was the procedure? The messengers of the beth din used to go out on the day before the festival and tie the unreaped corn in bunches to make it the easier to reap. All the inhabitants of the towns near by assembled there,  so that it might be reaped with much display. As soon as it became dark he  called out, ‘has the sun set’? And they answered. ‘yes.’ has the sun set’? And they answered, ‘yes.’ with  this  sickle’?  And they answered, ‘yes’. ‘with this sickle’? And they answered, yes’. ‘into this basket’? And they answered, ‘yes’. Into this basket’? And they answered. ‘yes’. On the sabbath he called out further, on this sabbath’? And they answered. ‘yes’. ‘on this sabbath’? And they answered. ‘yes’. ‘shall i reap’?   And they answered, reap’. ‘shall i reap’? And they answered, ‘reap’. He repeated every matter three times, and they answered, ‘yes.’ ‘yes.’ ‘yes’. And why was all this? Because of the boethusians   who maintained that the reaping of the ‘omer was not to take place at the conclusion of the [first day of the] festival.
Mishnah. They reaped it, put it into the baskets, and brought it to the temple court; then they parched it   with fire in order to fulfil the precept that it should be parched [with fire].   So r. Meir. But the sages say, they first beat it with reeds or stems of plants that the grains should not be crushed,   and then they put it into a pipe that was perforated so that the fire might take hold of all of it. They spread it out in the temple court so that the wind might blow over it.   Then they put it into a gristmill   and took out of it a tenth [of an ephah of flour] which was sifted through thirteen sieves. What was left over was redeemed and might be eaten by any one; it was liable to the dough-offering   but exempt from tithes.    Rabbi Akiba declares it liable both to the dough-offering and to tithes.
Mishnah. He  then came to the tenth, put in oil  and its frankincense, poured in the oil, mingled it, waved it, brought it near [to the altar], took from it the handful and burnt it; and the remainder was eaten by the priests. After the omer was offered they used to go out and find the market of jerusalem already full of meal and parched corn [of the new produce]; this, however, did not meet with the approval of the sages.   So r. Meir.  Rabbi Judah says, they did so with the approval of the sages.  
	mishnah. After the ‘omer was offered the new corn was permitted forthwith; but for those that lived far off   it was permitted only after midday. After the temple was destroyed r. Johanan b. Zakkai ordained that it should be forbidden throughout the day of the waving.    Rabbi Judah said, is it not so forbidden by the law of the torah, for it is written, until this selfsame day?   Wherefore was it permitted for them that lived far off immediately after midday?   Because they know that the beth din are not dilatory therewith.
Mishnah. The ‘omer rendered [the new corn] permitted throughout the land, and the two loaves  rendered it permitted in the temple.   One may not offer  minhahs,   first-fruits, or  minhahs that accompany animal offerings, before the ‘omer; and if one did so, it was invalid. Nor may one offer these before the two loaves; but if one did so it was valid.
Mishnah. Wheat, barley, spelt, oats and rye are subject to the dough-offering; and they can be reckoned together.   They are forbidden [to be eaten] as new produce before the ‘omer,   and they may not be reaped before the passover.   If they had taken root before the ‘omer, the ‘omer renders them permitted; otherwise they are forbidden until the next year's ‘omer.
Mishnah. One may reap [before the ‘omer the corn] in irrigated fields   in   the plain,   but one may not stack it. The men of jericho used to reap [before the ‘omer] with the approval of the sages,   and used to stack it without the approval of the sages, but they did not forbid them.   One may reap the unripe corn   and feed cattle therewith. Said r. Judah, when is this so? Only if one had begun to reap it before it had reached a third of its growth.  Rabbi  Shimon said, one may reap it and feed [cattle therewith] even after it has reached a third of its growth. One may reap on account of the saplings   or [in order to make an open space] for the mourners   or that the beth hamidrash be not hindered.   One may not bind them   in bundles but they must be left in small heaps. The precept   of the ‘omer is that it shall be brought from the standing corn;   if this cannot be found it may be brought from the sheaves. The precept is that it shall be brought from the fresh corn;   if this cannot be found it may be brought from the dry corn. The precept is that it shall be reaped by night; if it was reaped by day it is valid. Moreover it   overrides the sabbath.
	mishnah   from the following  minhahs the handful must be taken and the remainder is for the priests: the  minhah of fine flour,   that prepared on a griddle,   that prepared in a pan, the cakes and the wafers,   the  minhah of a gentile, the  minhah of women, the  minhah of the ‘omer, the sinners  minhah,   and the  minhah of jealousy.    Rabbi  Shimon says, from the sinners  minhah brought by priests the handful is taken,   and the handful is offered by itself and so also the remainder is offered by itself.
Mishnah. The  minhah of the priests,  the  minhah of the anointed high priest, and the  minhah that is offered with the drink-offerings are [wholly] for the altar and the priests have no share in them; with these the altar is more privileged than the priests. The two loaves and the showbread are eaten by the priests and the altar has no share in them; with these the priests are more privileged than the altar.
	mishnah. All  minhahs that are prepared in a vessel   require three applications of oil before they are made ready, viz., pouring, mingling and putting in.   The [baked] cakes   were mingled   [with oil]. So rabbi. But the sages say, the fine flour [was mingled with oil]. The cakes   required mingling and the wafers   anointing. How were they anointed? In the form of chi.   And the residue of the oil was consumed by the priests.
Mishnah. All  minhahs that are prepared in a vessel   require to be broken in pieces.
	mishnah. The  minhah  of an israelite was folded into two and the two were folded into four,  and it was severed  [at each bend]; the  minhah of priests was folded into two and the two were folded into four, but it was not severed;  the  minhah of the anointed high priest was not folded.  Rabbi  Shimon says, neither the  minhah of the priests  nor the  minhah of the anointed high priest was broken in pieces, since the handful was not taken from them, and whenever the handful is not taken [from the offering] it is not to be broken in pieces. They must all be broken into pieces the size of an olive. 
Mishnah. All  minhahs require to be rubbed  three hundred times and beaten  five hundred times. The rubbing and the beating apply to the grains of wheat.  Rabbi Jose says, to the dough.  All  minhahs consist  of ten cakes each, excepting the showbread and the griddle-cakes of the high priest, which consist of twelve cakes each. So r. Judah. But r. Meir says, they all consist of twelve cakes each, excepting the cakes of the thank-offering and of the nazirite-offering, which consist of ten cakes each.
	mishnah. The ‘omer consisted of one tenth [of an ephah of flour] taken from three se'ahs;  the two loaves consisted of two tenths taken from three se'ahs; and the showbread consisted of twenty-four tenths taken from twenty-four se'ahs.
Mishnah. The ‘omer   was sifted through thirteen sieves, the two loaves through twelve, and the showbread through eleven.  Rabbi  Shimon says, there was no prescribed number for them,   but they brought fine flour and sifted it as much as was necessary, as it is said, and thou shalt take fine flour and bake it:   [it may not be baked] until it is sifted as much as is necessary.  
Mishnah. The thank-offering required five se'ahs [of flour], jerusalem measure, which are six se'ahs wilderness measure;   this being equivalent to two ephahs (for an ephah is three se'ahs) or to twenty tenths [of an ephah], ten for the leavened cakes and ten for the unleavened.  
Mishnah. From each kind [the priest] took one tenth part as terumah,  as it is said, and of it he shall present one out of each offering as terumah unto the lord.  ‘one’: [means] that he may not take what is broken. ‘out of each offering’-that each kind of offering shall be equal,  [and] that he must not take [the terumah] from the one kind of offering instead of from another.  It shall be the priest's that sprinkleth the blood of the peace-offerings;  but the rest was consumed by the owner.
Mishnah. The consecration [ minhah]  consisted of [unleavened cakes] like the unleavened cakes of the thank-offering. Namely cakes, wafers, and soaked cakes. The nazirite  minhah   consisted of two thirds of the unleavened cakes of the thank-offering. Namely cakes and wafers. But not soaked cakes; thus there were ten kabs   by jerusalem measure. Which are six tenths and something over.  
Mishnah. If a man slaughtered the thank-offering within [the temple court] and the bread thereof was outside the wall [at the time]. The bread is not hallowed. If he slaughtered it before [the loaves] had become crusted in the oven, or even if all except one had become crusted, the bread is not hallowed.
Mishnah. If he slaughtered the thank-offering [intending to eat thereof] outside its proper time   or outside its proper place,   the bread is [nevertheless] hallowed.   If he slaughtered it and it was found to be trefah, the bread is not hallowed.   If he slaughtered it and it was found to have a blemish, r. Eliezer says, the bread is [nevertheless] hallowed. But the sages say, it is not hallowed. If he slaughtered it under another name, and so, too, if the ram of the consecration-offering or the two lambs offered at pentecost were slaughtered under another name, the bread is not hallowed.
Mishnah. If the drink-offerings   had already been hallowed in a vessel when the animal-offering was found to be invalid, if there is another animal-offering,   they may be offered with it; but if not, they are left to become invalid by remaining overnight.  
Mishnah. The young of a thank-offering,   its substitute,   and the animal which was set apart in the place of the thank-offering which was set apart and was lost,   do not require the bread-offering; for it is written, and he shall offer with the sacrifice of thank-offering;   the thank-offering requires the bread-offering, but its young, what is brought in its place, and its substitute, do not require the bread-offering.
Mishnah. If a man said. ‘behold i take upon myself [to bring] a thank-offering’, he must bring both it and its bread from what is unconsecrated.  
	mishnah. Whence [is it derived]that if a man says,’i take upon myself [to offer] a thank-offering’, he may bring it only from what is unconsecrated? Because it is written, and thou shalt sacrifice the passover-offering unto the lord thy god of the flock and the herd.   But is not the passover-offering brought only from the lambs and from the goats? Why then is it written, of the flock and the herd? It is to compare whatsoever is brought from the flock and the herd   with the passover-offering: as the passover-offering is obligatory and offered only from what is unconsecrated,   so everything that is obligatory   may be offered only from what is unconsecrated. Therefore if a man says, ‘i take upon myself [to offer] a thank-offering’, or ‘i take upon myself [to offer] a peace-offering’, since these are obligatory they may be offered only from what is unconsecrated. The drink-offerings in every case   may be offered only from what is unconsecrated.  
	mishnah. All the offerings   of the congregation or of the individual may be offered from [produce grown] in the land [of israel] or outside the land, from the new [produce] or from the old, excepting the ‘omer-offering and the two loaves, which must be offered only from the new produce and from [produce grown] in the land. All [offerings] must be offered from the choicest produce. And which is the choicest? Michmas   and zanoha   rank first for the quality of their fine flour; second to them is hafaraim   in the valley. The [produce of the] whole land   was valid, but they used to bring it from these places.
Mishnah. One may not bring [it]  from the produce of a manured field  or from an irrigated field  or from a field stocked with trees;   but if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. How was it   prepared? In the first year it was broken up and in the second year it was sown seventy days before passover; thus it would produce fine flour in abundance. How was it tested?   The temple-treasurer used to thrust his hand into it; if some dust came up in [his hand] it was invalid, until it was sifted [once more]. If it had become magotty it is invalid.
Mishnah. Tekoa   ranks first for the quality of its oil. Abba saul says, second to it is regeb   beyond the jordan. The [oil of the] whole land was valid, but they used to bring it only from these places. One may not bring it from a manured field   or from an irrigated field   or from olive-trees   planted in a field sown with seeds; but if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. One may not bring anfakinon,   yet if one did bring it it was valid.   One may not bring it from olive-berries which had been soaked in water or preserved or stewed; and if one did bring it it was invalid.
	mishnah. There are three [periods of gathering in the] olives and each crop gives three kinds of oil.  The first crop of olives is when the olives are picked  from the top of the tree; they are pounded  and put into the basket  (r. Judah says, around the basket);   this gives the first oil. They   are then pressed with the beam (r. Judah says, with stones);   this gives the second oil. They   are then ground and pressed again; this gives the third oil. The first [oil] is fit for the candlestick and the others for  minhahs. The second crop is when the olives at roof-level   are picked from the tree; they are pounded and put into the basket (r. Judah says, around the basket); this gives the first oil. They are then pressed with the beam (r. Judah says, with stones); this gives the second oil. They are then ground and pressed again; this gives the third oil. The first [oil] is fit for the candlestick and the others for  minhahs. The third crop is when the last olives   of the tree are packed in the vat until they become overripe;   they are then taken up and dried on the roof, and then pounded and put into the basket (r. Judah says, around the basket); this gives the first oil. They are next pressed with the beam (r. Judah says, with stones) this gives the second oil. They are then ground and pressed again; this gives the third oil. The first [oil] is fit for the candlestick and the others for  minhahs.
Mishnah. As to the first oil of the first crop, there is none better than it. The second oil of the first crop and the first oil of the second crop are equal. The third oil of the first crop. The second oil of the second crop. And the first oil of the third crop are equal. The third oil of the second crop and the second oil of the third crop are equal. As to the third oil of the third crop. There is none worse than it. By right it could be inferred by the following argument that  minhahs should require the purest olive oil: if the candlestick, which does not need [the oil] for eating, requires pure olive oil, how much more do  minhahs, which [need the oil] for eating,   require pure olive oil! But the text states, pure olive oil beaten for the light,   but not ‘pure olive oil beaten for  minhahs.
Mishnah. From whence did they bring the wine?   Keruhim   and ‘attulim rank first for the quality of their wine. Second to them are beth rimmah, beth laban on the hill. And kefar signa in the valley. [wine of the] whole land was valid but they used to bring it only from these places. One may not bring it from a manured field or from an irrigated field or from vines planted in a field sown with seeds;   but if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. One may not bring wine from sun-dried grapes,   but if one did bring it it was valid. One may not bring old wine.   So rabbi. But the sages permit it. One may not bring sweet wine   or smoked wine or cooked wine, and if one did bring it it was invalid. One may not bring wine from the grapes of the espalier, but only from the vines growing from the ground and from well-cultivated vineyards. One did not put [the wine] in large casks but in small barrels; and one did not fill the barrels to the brim so that its scent might spread.   One may not take the wine at the mouth of the barrel because of
The scum, nor that at the bottom because of the lees; but one should take it only from the middle third of the barrel.  How was it tested?  The temple-treasurer used to sit nearby with his stick  in his hand; when the froth burst forth he would knock with his stick.   Rabbi Jose son of r. Judah says, wine on which there is a scum is invalid, for it is written, they shall be unto you without blemish, and their  minhah;  and they shall be unto you without blemish, and their drink-offerings.  	Mishnah. There were two dry-measures in the temple: the tenth   and the half-tenth.    Rabbi Meir says, a tenth, [another] tenth, and a half-tenth. For what purpose did the tenth measure serve? By it one used to measure the  minhahs. One did not measure with a three-tenths measure [the  minhah] for a bullock   or with a two-tenths measure [the  minhah] for a ram,   but one measured them by so many tenths. For what purpose did the half-tenth measure serve? By it one used to measure the griddlecakes of the high priest   [which was offered] the half in the morning and the half towards evening.
Mishnah. There were seven liquid-measures in the temple: the hin,   the half-hin, the third-hin, the quarter-hin, the log, the half-log, and the quarter-log.  Rabbi Eliezer son of r. Zadok says, there were markings in the hin measure [indicating] thus far for a bullock, thus far for a ram, and thus far for a lamb.    Rabbi  Shimon says, there was no hin measure there at all; for what purpose could the hin serve?   But there was an additional measure   of one log and a half by which one used to measure [the oil]   for the  minhah of the high priest, a log and a half in the morning and a log and a half towards evening. G
Mishnah. For what purpose did the quarter-log serve? [to measure] a quarter-log of water for the leper   and a quarter-log of oil for the nazirite.   For what purpose did the half-log serve? [to measure] a half-log of water for the suspected woman   and a half-log of oil for the thank-offering. With the log one measured [the oil] for all the  minhahs. Even a  minhah of sixty tenths   required sixty logs [of oil].  Rabbi Eliezer b. Jacob says, even a  minhah of sixty tenths required only one log [of oil], for it is written, for a  minhah, and a log of oil.   Six [logs]   were required for a bullock. Four   for a ram, and three   for a lamb; three logs and a half for the candlestick, a half-log for each lamp.
	mishnah. One may mix the drink-offerings   of bullocks with the drink-offerings of rams,   or the drink-offerings of lambs with the drink-offerings of other lambs, or those of an individual offering with those of a communal offering, or those of [an offering offered] to-day with those of [an offering offered] yesterday;  but one may not mix the drink-offerings of lambs with the drink-offerings of bullocks or of rams.  If after each was mingled  by itself they were mixed together, they are valid; but if before each was mingled by itself [they were mixed together], they are invalid. Although the  minhah of the lamb that was offered with the ‘omer was doubled,  its drink-offerings were not doubled. 
Mishnah. All the measures in the temple were heaped excepting [that used for] the high priest's [ minhah] which included in itself the heaped measure.  The overflow of the liquid-measures was holy, but the overflow of the dry-measures was not holy.  Rabbi Akiba said, the liquid-measures were holy, therefore their overflow was holy too; the dry-measures were not holy, therefore their overflow was not holy.  Rabbi Jose said. It is not on that account but because liquids are stirred up  and dry-stuffs are not. G
Mishnah. All the offerings of the congregation and of the individual require drink-offerings  except the firstling, the tithe of cattle, the passover-offering, the sin-offering and the guilt-offering; but the sin-offering and guilt-offering of the leper require drink-offerings.
	mishnah. None of the offerings of the congregation require the laying on of hands except the bullock that is offered for the transgression [by the congregation]  of any of the commandments, and the scapegoat.   Rabbi  Shimon says, also the he-goat offered for the sin of idolatry.  All the offerings of an individual require the laying on of hands except the firstling, the cattle tithe, and the passover-offering. The heir may lay his hands [on his father's offering].  May bring the drink-offerings for it, and can substitute [another animal for it]. 
	mishnah. All may lay the hands on the offering except a deaf-mute, an imbecile, a minor, a blind man, a gentile, a slave, an agent, or a woman. The laying on of hands is outside the commandment.   [one must lay] both hands on the head of the animal; and in the place where one lays on the hands there the animal must be slaughtered; and the slaughtering must immediately follow the laying on of hands.
Mishnah. The rite of the laying on of hands is [in certain respects] more stringent than the rite of waving. And the rite of waving is [in other respects] more stringent than the rite of the laying on of hands. [the rite of the laying on of hands is more stringent,] for one may perform the waving on behalf of all the other fellow-owners but one may not perform the laying on of hands on behalf of all the other fellow-owners. The rite of waving is more stringent, for the rite of waving takes place in offerings of the individual   and in offerings of the congregation,  
For living animals and for slaughtered animals, and for things that have life and for things that have not life;  but it is not so with the rite of the laying on of hands.
Mishnah. The two loaves [of pentecost] were kneaded separately and baked separately. The [cakes of the] showbread were kneaded separately and baked in pairs. They   were prepared in a mould; and when they were taken out from the oven they were again put in a mould lest they become damaged.
Mishnah. The two loaves and the showbread were alike in that the kneading and the shaping were performed outside [the temple court], but the baking inside; and it  did not override the sabbath.  Rabbi Judah says, all these works were performed inside [the temple court].  Rabbi  Shimon says, accustom thyself to say, the two loaves and the showbread were valid whether made in the temple court or in beth page. 
Mishnah. The kneading, the shaping, and the baking of the high priest's griddle-cakes  were performed within  [the temple court], and they overrode the sabbath; the grinding [of the corn for it] and the sifting did not override the sabbath.  Rabbi Akiba laid down this general rule: any work that can be done on the eve of the sabbath does not override the sabbath, but that which cannot be done on the eve of the sabbath overrides the sabbath.  All  minhahs require a vessel [of ministry for those works that are performed] within,  but do not require a vessel [of ministry for those works that are performed] outside. The two loaves were seven handbreadths long and four wide and their horns  were four fingerbreadths. The [cakes of the] showbread were ten handbreadths long and five wide and their horns  were seven fingerbreadths.  Rabbi Judah says, lest you err [remember but the words] zadad yahaz.  Ben zoma says, and thou shalt set upon the table shew bread before me continually:   ‘showbread’ signifies that it shall have all its surfaces visible.   The table was ten handbreadths long and five wide;   the cakes of the showbread were ten handbreadths long and five wide. Each cake was placed lengthwise across the breadth of the table, and two and a half handbreadths were turned up   at either side so that its length filled the entire breadth of the table. This is the view of r. Judah.  Rabbi Meir says, the table was twelve handbreadths long and six wide;   the cakes of the showbread were ten handbreadths long and five wide. Each cake was placed lengthwise across the breadth of the table, and two handbreadths were turned up at either side; and there was a space of two handbreadths between [the two sets] so that the wind could blow between them.   Abba saul says, there they used to put the two dishes of frankincense pertaining to the showbread. They said to him, is it not written, and thou shalt put pure frankincense upon [‘al] each row?   He replied, but is it not written, and next unto [‘al] him shall be the tribe of manasseh?  

   	there were there four golden props,   branched at the top, which supported the cakes, two for the one row and two for the other row. And there were twenty-eight rods,   each [shaped] like the half of a hollow reed, fourteen for the one row and fourteen for the other row. Neither the placing of the rods nor their removal overrode the sabbath, but [a priest] used to enter on the day before the sabbath, draw out the rods, and place them   parallel with the length of the table.   Every article that stood in the temple was placed with its length parallel with the length of the house.  
	mishnah. There were two tables inside the porch at the entrance of the house, the one of marble   and the other of gold. On the table of marble they laid the showbread when it was brought in, and on the table of gold they laid the showbread when it was brought out, since what is holy we must raise [in honour] but not bring down. And within [the sanctuary] was a table of gold whereon the showbread lay continually. Four priests entered, two bearing the two rows [of the showbread] in their hands and two bearing the two dishes [of frankincense] in their hands; and four went in before them, two to take away the two rows [of the showbread] and two to take away the two dishes [of frankincense]. Those who brought them in stood at the north side with their faces to the south, and those who took them away stood at the south side with their faces to the north.   These withdrew [the old] and the others laid down [the new], the handbreadth of the one being by the side of the handbreadth of the other,   for it is written, before me continually.    Rabbi Jose says, even if these [first] took away [the old] and the others laid down [the new later on], this too fulfils the requirement of continually’. They went and laid [the old bread] on the table of gold that was in the porch. The dishes [of frankincense] were then burnt and the cakes were distributed among the priests.   If the day of atonement fell on a sabbath the cakes were distributed in the evening.   If it fell on a friday the he-goat of the day of atonement   was consumed in the evening.   The babylonian [priests] used to eat it raw for they were not fastidious.  
	mishnah. If [the priest] set the showbread on the sabbath and the dishes [of frankincense] on the day after the sabbath, and burnt the dishes [of frankincense] on the [next] sabbath, it is not valid,  and one is not liable thereby for piggul,  nothar,   or uncleanness.   If he set the bread and the dishes [of frankincense] on the sabbath and burnt the dishes of frankincense on the day after the sabbath, it is not valid, and one is not liable thereby for piggul, nothar, or uncleanness. If he set the bread and the dishes [of frankincense] on the day after the sabbath and burnt the dishes [of frankincense] on the [next] sabbath, it is not valid.   What should he do? He should leave it until the following sabbath,   for even if it remains many days on the table there is no harm.
Mishnah. The two loaves were eaten never earlier than on the second day  and never later than on the third day. How is this explained? [normally] they were baked on the day before the festival  and eaten on the festival, that is, on the second day. If the festival fell on the day after the sabbath,  they would be eaten on the third day. The showbread was eaten never earlier than on the ninth day and never later than on the eleventh day. How is this explained? [normally] it was baked on the day before the sabbath and eaten on the sabbath [of the following week], that is on the ninth day. If a festival fell on the day before the sabbath,   it would then be eaten on the tenth day. If the two days of the new year [fell before the sabbath],   it would then be eaten on the eleventh day. [the baking] overrides neither the sabbath nor the festival.  Rabbi  Shimon b. Gamaliel says in the name of r.  Shimon, son of the deputy [high priest], it overrides the festival but not the fast-day.  
Mishnah. If  minhahs and drink-offerings became unclean before they were hallowed in a vessel [of ministry]. They may be redeemed;   if [they became unclean] after they were hallowed in a vessel, they may not be redeemed. Bird-offerings, the wood, the frankincense, and the vessels of ministry,   may not be redeemed, for the rule of redemption applies only to [offerings of] cattle.
	mishnah. If a man said, ‘i take upon myself [to bring a  minhah prepared] on a griddle’, and he brought one prepared in a pan, or ‘a  minhah prepared in a pan’, and he brought one prepared on a griddle, what he has brought he has brought,   but he has not discharged the obligation of his vow. But [if he said, ‘i take upon myself] to bring this [meal] as a  minhah prepared on a griddle’, and he brought it prepared in a pan; or as a  minhah prepared in a pan’, and he brought it prepared on a griddle, it is invalid.   If he said, ‘i take upon myself to bring two tenths in one vessel, and he brought them in two vessels, or in two vessels’, and he brought them in one vessel, what he has brought he has brought, but he has not discharged the obligation of his vow. But [if he said, ‘i take upon myself to bring] these [two tenths] in one vessel’, and he brought them in two vessels, or in two vessels’, and he brought them in one vessel, they are invalid.   If he said, ‘i take upon myself to bring two tenths in one vessel’ and he brought them in two vessels, and when they said to him, thou didst vow to bring them in one vessel’, he still offered them in two vessels, they are invalid;   but if he thereupon offered them in one vessel they are valid. If he said i take upon myself to bring two tenths in two vessels’, and he brought them in one vessel, and when they said to him, ‘thou didst vow to bring them in two vessels’, he thereupon offered them in two vessels they are valid; but if he still kept them in one vessel, they are reckoned as two  minhahs which have been mixed.  
	mishnah. If a man said, ‘i take upon myself to bring a  minhah of barley’, he must bring one of wheat;  if ‘of coarse meal’, he must bring it of fine flour; if ‘without oil and without frankincense’, he must nevertheless bring it with oil and frankincense; if ‘half a tenth, he must bring a whole tenth; if a tenth and a half’, he must bring two.  Rabbi  Shimon declares him exempt, because he did not make his offering in the manner in which people usually make their offerings.
	mishnah. A man may offer a  minhah consisting of sixty tenths and bring them in one vessel if  a man said, i take upon myself to offer sixty tenths’, he may bring them in one vessel. But if he said, i take upon myself to offer sixty-one tenths’, he must bring sixty in one vessel and the one in another vessel; for since the congregation bring on the first day of the feast [of tabernacles] when it falls on a sabbath sixty-one tenths [as a  minhah],  it is enough for an individual that [his  minhah] be less by one tenth than that of the congregation.  Rabbi  Shimon said, but some of these [sixty-one tenths] are for the bullocks and some for the lambs, and they may not be mixed one with the other!  But the fact is that up to sixty tenths they can be mingled [in one vessel].   They said to him, can sixty be mingled [in one vessel] and not sixty-one? He answered, so it is with all the measures prescribed by the sages: a man may immerse himself in forty seahs   of water, but he may not immerse himself in forty se'ahs less one kortob.  
Mishnah. One may not offer one [log], two, or five [logs],  but one may offer three, four, six,  or anything above six.  
	mishnah. One may offer wine  but not oil. This is the opinion of r. Akiba. But r. Tarfon says, one may also offer oil.   Rabbi Tarfon said, as we find that wine which is offered as an obligation  may be offered as a freewill-offering,  so oil which is offered as an obligation may be offered as a freewill-offering.  Rabbi Akiba said to him, no, if you say so of wine it is because it is offered by itself even when offered as an obligation;  can you say the same of oil which is not offered by itself when offered as an obligation?  Two [men] may not jointly offer one tenth; but they may jointly offer a burnt-offering or a peace-offering, and of birds even a single bird.
Mishnah. [if a man said], ‘i take upon myself to bring a tenth’, he must bring one [tenth]; if ‘tenths’, he must bring two [tenths]. [if he said,] ‘i specified [a certain number of tenths] but i do not know what number i specified’, he must bring sixty tenths   [if he said,] ‘i take upon myself to bring a  minhah’, he may bring whichever kind he chooses.    Rabbi Judah says, he must bring a  minhah of fine flour, for that is the principal  minhah. [if he said] a  minhah’ or ‘a kind of  minhah’, he must bring one [of any kind]; if ‘ minhahs’ or a kind of  minhahs’, he must bring two [of any one kind]; [if he said,] ‘i specified [a certain kind], but i do not know what kind i specified’, he must bring the five kinds [if he said,] ‘i specified a  minhah of [a certain number of] tenths   but i do not know what number i specified, he must bring sixty tenths. But rabbi says, he must bring  minhahs [of every number] of tenths from one to sixty.  
Mishnah. [if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer [pieces of] wood’, he must bring not less than two logs. If ‘frankincense’, he must bring not less than a handful. The handful is specified in five cases: if a man said, ‘i take upon myself to bring frankincense’. He must bring not less than a handful. If he offered a  minhah he must bring a handful of frankincense with it. If a man offered up the handful outside [the temple court] he is liable.   The two dishes [of frankincense]   require two handfuls.

   	[if a man said.] ‘i take upon myself to offer gold’, he must bring not less than a golden denar;   if silver’, he must bring not less than a silver denar; if ‘copper’. He must bring not less than [the value of] a silver ma'ah.   [if he said.] ‘i specified [how much i would bring] but i do not know what i specified’. He must bring so much until he says. ‘i certainly did not intend to give so much!’
	mishnah. [if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer wine’, he must bring not less than three log.  If ‘oil’, he must bring not less than one log;  but rabbi says, not less than three logs.  [if he said,] i specified [how much i would offer] but i do not know what quantity i specified’, he must bring that quantity which is the most that is brought on any one day. 
Mishnah. [if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer a burnt-offering,   he must bring a lamb.    Rabbi Eleazar b. Azariah said, [he may bring] a turtle-dove or a young pigeon. [if he said,] ‘i specified a beast of the herd   but i do not know what it was i specified’, he must bring a bull and a bull calf. [if he said, ‘i specified] a beast of the cattle   but i do not know what it was i specified’, he must bring a bull, a bull calf, a ram, a he-goat, a he-kid. And a he-lamb. [if he said,] ‘i specified [some kind] but i do not know what it was i specified’,
He must add to these a turtle-dove and a young pigeon.

   	[if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer a thank-offering or a peace-offering’,  he must bring a lamb.[if he said,] ‘i specified a beast of the herd but i do not know what it was i specified’, he must bring a bull and a cow, a bull calf and a heifer. [if he said, i specified] a beast of the cattle but i do not know what it was i specified’, he must bring a bull and a cow, a bull calf and a heifer. A ram and a ewe, a he-goat and a she-goat, a he-kid and a she-kid, a he-lamb and a ewe-lamb.

   	[if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer an ox. He must bring one with its drink-offerings to the value of a maneh;  if ‘a calf’, he must bring one with its drink-offerings to the value of five sela's; if ‘a ram’, he must bring one with its drink-offerings to the value of two sela's;  if ‘a lamb’, he must bring one with its drink-offerings to the value of one sela’. If he said ‘an ox valued at one maneh’, he must bring one worth a maneh apart from its drink-offerings; if a calf valued at five sela's’. He must bring one worth five sela's apart from its drink-offerings; if ‘a ram valued at two sela's’, he must bring one worth two sela's apart from its drink-offerings; and if a lamb valued at one sela’,’ he must bring one worth one sela’ apart from its drink-offerings. [if he said, ‘i take upon myself to offer] an ox valued at a maneh’, and he brought two together worth a maneh, he has not fulfilled his obligation. Even if one was worth a maneh less one denar and the other also was worth a maneh less one denar. [if he said] ‘a black one’ and he brought a white one, or a white one’ and he brought a black one, or ‘a large one’ and he brought a small one, he has not fulfilled his obligation. [if he said] ‘a small one’ and he brought a large one, he has fulfilled his obligation; but rabbi says, he has not fulfilled his obligation. Mishnah. [if a man said,] ‘this ox shall be a burnt-offering’, and it suffered a blemish,   he may, if he so desires, bring two with the price thereof. [if he said,] ‘these two oxen shall be a burnt-offering’, and they suffered a blemish, he may, if he so desires, bring one ox with the price thereof. But rabbi forbids it.   [if he said,] ‘this ram shall be a burnt-offering, and it suffered a blemish, he may, if he so desires, bring a lamb with the price thereof. [if he said,] ‘this lamb shall be a burnt-offering’. And it suffered a blemish, he may, if he so desires, bring a ram with the price thereof. But rabbi forbids it.
Mishnah. If a man said, ‘one of my lambs shall be holy’, or ‘one of my oxen shall be holy’, and he had two only, the larger one is holy. If he had three, the middle one is holy. [if he said,] ‘i specified one but i do not know which it was i specified’, or [if he said,] ‘my father told me   [that he had specified one] but i do not know which it is’, the largest one among them must be holy.
	mishnah. [if a man said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer a burnt-offering, he must offer it in the temple;  and if he offered it in the temple of onias,  he has not fulfilled his obligation. [if he said,] ‘i take upon myself to offer a burnt-offering but i will offer it in the temple of onias’. He must offer it in the temple,  yet if he offered it in the temple of onias he has fulfilled his obligation.  Rabbi  Shimon says, such is no burnt-offering. [if a man said.] ‘i will be a nazirite’. He must bring his offerings  in the temple; and if he brought them in the temple of onias he has not fulfilled his obligation. [if he said,] i will be a nazirite but i will bring my offerings in the temple of onias’. He must bring them in the temple, yet if he brought them in the temple of onias he has fulfilled his obligation.  Rabbi  Shimon says, such a one is not a nazirite.
Mishnah. The priests who ministered in the temple of onias may not minister in the temple in jerusalem; and needless to say [this is so of priests who ministered to] another matter;   for it is written, nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the altar of the lord in jerusalem. But they did eat unleavened bread among their brethren.   Thus they are like those that had a blemish:   they are entitled to share and eat [of the holy things]. But they are not permitted to offer sacrifices.
	mishnah. It is said of the burnt-offerings of cattle, an offering made by fire of a sweet savour;   and of the burnt-offerings of birds, an offering made by fire of a sweet savour;   and of the  minhah, an offering made by fire of a sweet savour:   to teach you that it is the same whether a man offers much or little, so long as he directs his heart to heaven.

