Zevahim, Chapter Fourteen, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
When the Tabernacle stood in Gilgal, Nov and Givon, it was permitted to offer sacrifices at local altars. Still there were certain sacrifices that were offered only at the Tabernacle, as we explained in connection to some of the earlier mishnayot of this chapter. Our mishnah discusses the difference between the “bamah of the congregation” that was in the Tabernacle and the “bamah of the individual,” the local altars that were found elsewhere. 

Mishnah Ten
The following sacrifices were offered in the Tabernacle—sacrifices consecrated for the Tabernacle: 
Public sacrifices were offered in the Tabernacle, and private sacrifices were offered at a bamah.   
If private sacrifices were consecrated for the Tabernacle, they must be offered in the Tabernacle; yet if one offered them at a bamah, he is not liable.
What is the difference between the bamah of an individual and the bamah of the congregation? 
Laying [of hands], 
slaughtering in the north, 
sprinkling around [the altar], 
waving and presenting,  
(Rabbi Judah says: there were no meal-offerings at the bamah);
priesthood, 
sacrificial vestments, 
ministering vessels, 
a sweet fragrance, 
a line of demarcation for [the sprinkling of] the blood,  
and the washing of hands and feet.  
But [the prohibitions of] time, remnant and defilement were the same in both.

Explanation
Section one: The general rule is that public sacrifices had to be performed at the Tabernacle, and that any private sacrifices could be offered at the local altar, the bamah of the congregation.
Section two: If an individual specifically stated that he was consecrating an animal in order to offer it at the Tabernacle, then it must be offered at the Tabernacle. If he nevertheless goes ahead and offers it at a bamah, he is not liable for offering a sacrifice outside the Temple.
Section three: This list consists of actions that were to be performed at the Tabernacle, but not at a local bamah. I shall explain each separately:
Laying [of hands]: Laying one’s hands on the sacrifice before it is slaughtered.  
Slaughtering in the north: side of the altar, obligatory for most holy sacrifices. 
Sprinkling around [the altar]: sprinkling the blood on various corners of the altar. 
Waving and presenting: the minhah (meal) offering.  
(Rabbi Judah says: there were no meal-offerings at the bamah): Rabbi Judah disagrees and holds that minhah offerings were only offered at the Tabernacle. 
Priesthood: sacrifices could be offered by non-priests at the local bamot.
Sacrificial vestments: neither did the person offering have to wear the priestly clothing.
Ministering vessels: He also did not need to use sanctified vessels. 
A sweet fragrance: Inside the Tabernacle (and subsequently the Temple) it was prohibited to put onto the altar limbs of a sacrifice that have already been roasted elsewhere. Such limbs will not give off the sweet fragrance of roasting meat (think bbq!). This was not prohibited at local altars, where one could first roast the limb and then put it onto the altar.
A line of demarcation for [the sprinkling of] the blood: On the altar in the Tabernacle there was a crimson line separating the upper and lower parts. Blood of some sacrifices was sprinkled below and of others it was sprinkled above. There was no such line on the local altar.  
And the washing of hands and feet: In the Tabernacle and Temple priests had to wash their hands and feet before performing any of the worship service. There was no such requirement for local altars.
Section four: When it comes to these three prohibitions, they apply to local altars just as they do to the public altar. If one offering the sacrifice intends to eat it after the prescribed time, he has rendered it invalid. The laws governing when a sacrifice must be eaten, and when it becomes “remnant,” which is prohibited, apply in all places. And the prohibition of offering or eating a sacrifice when impure, applies to individual bamot as well. 

Congratulations!  We have finished Tractate Zevahim!
It is a tradition at this point to thank God for helping us finish learning the tractate and to commit ourselves to going back and relearning it, so that we may not forget it and so that its lessons will stay with us for all of our lives.
Tractate Zevahim introduced us to a world which probably seems quite strange. To imagine a version of Judaism centered on animal sacrifice is probably quite difficult for modern Jews, myself included. For two thousand years, Jews have not offered sacrifices, and it is hard to imagine returning to such a form of Judaism. However, that is not the point of learning Zevahim. In my opinion, there are at least three solid reasons to study Zevahim in particular and Seder Kodashim in general. The first is that it is always interesting and helpful to remind ourselves of where our religion comes from and what it would have been like in ancient times. I also hope that learning Zevahim will make Leviticus more interesting, when you hear it in the synagogue. Second, and more importantly, in Zevahim we can see a system created by the rabbis based on their interpretation of Torah, and not just a simple record of how things were done in the Temple. This allows us to get into the mindset of the rabbis and understand better who they were and how they created their laws. Third, many later principles of halakhah, especially those connected with prayer, have their origins in sacrificial law. So while most of these laws are no longer observed, their principles often still manifest themselves.
In any case, I hope you enjoyed Zevahim. I know that I especially enjoyed writing my commentary on it, for I always learn the most when I have to try to explain something to others. Tomorrow we start Tractate Menahot.  



