Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah contains a debate between the sages and Rabbi Yose the Galilean similar in structure to the debate in yesterday’s mishnah. Here the topic is an unclean person who eats sacrifices. This is prohibited in Leviticus 7:20.

Mishnah Two
An unclean [person] who eats [of sacrifices], whether unclean sacrifices or clean sacrifices, is liable. 
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: an unclean person who eats clean [sacrifices] is liable, but an unclean person who eats unclean [sacrifices] is not liable because he ate only that which is unclean. 
They said to him: even when an unclean person eats clean [sacrifices], when he touches it, he defiles it.   
A clean person who eats unclean [sacrifices] is not liable, because one is liable only on account of bodily uncleanness. 

Explanation
Section one: Leviticus 7:20 says that an unclean person who intentionally eats a sacrifice is punished with karet. According to the first opinion in the mishnah, this prohibition applies whether the sacrifice was clean and therefore permitted, or unclean and was prohibited.
Section two: Rabbi Yose the Galilean says that an unclean person is liable for eating a sacrifice that he would otherwise have been allowed to eat, i.e a clean sacrifice. If he ate an unclean sacrifice he is not liable because he couldn’t have eaten it even if he was clean. This is similar to Rabbi Yose’s reasoning in yesterday’s mishnah, where he stated that one is liable for offering up a sacrifice outside of the Temple only if the sacrifice was slaughtered in the Temple. 
Section three: As in yesterday’s mishnah, the sages respond to Rabbi Yose the Galilean by saying that an unclean person cannot eat a clean sacrifice, because as soon as he touches it, he renders it unclean. Therefore, when the Torah states that it is a transgression for an unclean person to eat a sacrifice, it doesn’t make a difference whether the sacrifice was clean (before he began to eat it) or unclean—in both cases he is liable.
Section four: The mishnah now limits the punishment in Leviticus 7:20 to a case of an unclean person who eats a clean sacrifice. While it is forbidden for a clean person to eat an unclean sacrifice, he is not liable for karet or a hatat if he does so. 

