Zevahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three
 
Mishnah Three
An asham which was mixed up with a shelamim:
They graze until they become unfit.
Rabbi Shimon says: they are slaughtered at the north [side of the altar] and eaten in accordance with [the laws of] the more stringent of them.   
They said to him: one must not bring sacrifices to a place of unfitness.   
If pieces [of sacrificial flesh] were mixed up with pieces [of other sacrificial flesh], most sacred sacrifices with lesser sacrifices, [pieces] that are eaten one day with [those] that are eaten two days and one night, they must be eaten in accordance with [the laws of] the more stringent of them.

Explanation
Section one: According to the first opinion in the mishnah, if an asham and a shelamim get mixed up, then the same thing must be done with them as is done with all sacrifices that are mixed up—they graze until they become unfit, and then he must bring two new sacrifices, both at the cost of the higher of them (see yesterday’s mishnah). 
According to Rabbi Shimon, there is another solution in this case. Both sacrifices can be offered and slaughtered in the north of the Temple courtyard, as is the rule for the asham. They are eaten in accordance with the stricter laws, which are those for the asham. They must be eaten within the Temple walls, by male priests only, for one day and the following night. With regard to the blood applications, the laws are the same. 
The rabbis respond that this might cause the loss of a sacrifice. One of these sacrifices is a shelamim, which can be eaten for two days and the night in between. If we treat both as ashams, and they are left over after the first night, we will treat them as remnant and burn the leftover. This might cause a valid sacrifice to be destroyed. Since unnecessarily burning sacrifices should be avoided so as not to disgrace the sacrifice, it is better that neither are offered and both are left to graze until they become unfit, as was described above.
Section two: If pieces of sacrificial meat get mixed up, for instance hatat meat with shelamim meat, then the rabbis agree with Rabbi Shimon that the only thing we can do is treat all of the meat with the laws governing the stricter of the sacrifices. In this case, all of the meat will be eaten by priests, for one day and one night, within the Temple confines, as are the rules for the hatat. Any meat left over will have to be burned, because there is no other solution in this case.    

