Zevahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
While the blood of most sacrifices is sprinkled on the outer altar, the altar that was in the courtyard, some sacrifices have their blood sprinkled inside, on the golden altar that was in the Sanctuary (the Hekhal). These sacrifices were described in 5:2. Our mishnah deals with a situation where blood that was supposed to be sprinkled inside was mixed up with blood that was supposed to be sprinkled outside. 

Mishnah Eleven
If [blood] which is to be sprinkled inside [the Sanctuary] was mixed with [blood] that is to be sprinkled outside, it must be poured out into the duct. 
If [the priest] sprinkled outside and then sprinkled inside, it is valid. 
[If he sprinkled] inside and then went back and sprinkled outside: 
Rabbi Akiva declares it unfit, 
But the sages declare it fit. 
For Rabbi Akiva says: all blood which entered the Sanctuary to make atonement is unfit; 
But the sages say: the hatat alone [is unfit]. 
R. Eliezer said: the asham too, for it says, “As is the hatat, so is the asham” (Leviticus 7:7). 

Explanation
Section one: If inside and outside blood are mixed up together, then the mixture should be poured into the duct.
Section two: If, however, the priest did not ask and went ahead and sprinkled the blood, if he first sprinkled it outside and then inside, it is valid.
Section three: The thornier problem is if he first brought the blood inside and sprinkled it on the inner altar and then brought it back outside and sprinkled it on the outer altar. According to Rabbi Akiva, the blood sprinkled on the outer altar is invalid. According to Rabbi Akiva, once blood that is supposed to be sprinkled on the outer altar is brought into the Sanctuary, it is disqualified.
The other sages say that both blood applications are valid. The rule that once blood enters the Sanctuary it is invalid to spill it outside was stated only with regard to the hatat, as it says in Leviticus 6:23, “But no sin offering (hatat) whose blood has been brought into the Tent of Meeting for expiation in the sanctuary may be eaten; it shall be burned in the fire.”
Rabbi Eliezer expands this to include the asham because Leviticus 7:7 says that the rules that govern the hatat also govern the asham. 


