Zevahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today’s mishnah provides instruction concerning the sacrifice of the hatat.

Mishnah Three
[Concerning] public and private hatats: (These are the public hatats: the goats of new moons and festivals) 
They are slaughtered in the north, and their blood is received in ministering vessels in the north, and their blood requires four applications on the four corners [of the altar]. 
How was it done? He went up the ascent, turned to the surrounding walkway, and came to the south-east corner, then the north-east, then the north-west, and then the south-west. 
He would pour the residue of the blood out at the southern base. 
They were eaten within the hangings [of the Tabernacle], by male priests, prepared in any fashion, the same day and night, until midnight.

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah notes that the discussion here is concerning both the public and the private hatat. In a parenthetical remark, the mishnah lists the public hatats, meaning those offered on behalf of the entire people of Israel. These include the goats offered on Rosh Hodesh (the new moons) and festivals. These are listed in Numbers 28: 15ff.
Section two: The hatat, like all most holy sacrifices, is slaughtered on the north side of the altar. Its blood is then received in ministering vessels. The blood of the hatat is spilled on all four corners (or horns, the word is the same in Hebrew) of the altar that stands outside in the Temple courtyard. 
Section three: The priest would ascend the altar on the ascent, and arrive at a walkway that surrounds the altar, known as the “sovev” in Hebrew. The ascent begins on the southern side of the altar, and the priest would first arrive at the southeastern corner. He would then walk north to the northeastern corner, then west to the northwestern corner, and finish at the southwestern corner. 
Section four: The residues of the blood would be poured out on the southern base to the altar. 
Section five: The hatat must be eaten within the Temple confines. The mishnah expresses this by referring to the Tabernacle, and the hangings that enclosed it. When it comes to the Temple, the hatat must be eaten within the walls of the Temple courtyard.
Any priest can eat the hatat. 
The priests can prepare the hatat in any manner they like. This distinguishes it from the pesah sacrifice, which must be roasted.
The hatat must be eaten on the day that it is sacrificed and the remainder of the night, up until midnight. The next morning it will become remnant, and anyone who eats it will be liable for karet. See Leviticus 7:15, and Mishnah Berakhot 1:1.


