Zevahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with the subject of when a sacrificial bird that was nipped (this is how sacrificial birds are slaughtered) causes impurity if its flesh is swallowed. We began to discuss this subject in mishnah three. 

Mishnah Five
If he nipped [the bird sacrifice] with his left [hand] or at night; if he slaughtered hullin within [the Temple courtyard] or a sacrifice outside [the Temple courtyard] they do not defile in the gullet.  
If he nipped with a knife; or if he nipped hullin within [or] sacrifices without; or [if he sacrificed] turtle-doves before their time or pigeons after their time; [or a bird] whose wing was withered, [or] blind in the eye [or] whose foot was cut off, — [all these] defile in the gullet. 
This is the general rule: all whose unfitness [arose] in sanctity do not defile in the gullet; if their unfitness did not arise in sanctity, they defile in the gullet.
And anyone who is unfit who nips, their nipping is invalid, and they [the birds] do not defile in the gullet.

Explanation
Section one:  As I stated in the commentary to mishnah three, one who eats a pure bird that was not slaughtered properly becomes impure when the flesh of the bird reaches his gullet. Our mishnah lists cases where an action was done improperly with the slaughtering of a bird sacrifice. A bird sacrifice must be nipped with the right hand, during the day, so if he nips it with the left hand or at night, it is invalid. If one brings a non-sacred bird into the Temple and slaughters it (not nips but slaughters by cutting its neck), it may not be eaten, and a sacrifice that was slaughtered (not nipped) outside of the Temple is invalid. In all of these cases, the slaughtering or nipping was done properly, but it was done at the wrong time, with the wrong hand, or in the wrong place. Since the slaughtering/nipping itself was done correctly, the flesh of the bird doesn’t cause impurity.
Section two:  In contrast, in some these cases the slaughtering itself was performed incorrectly. Nipping must be done with one’s fingernail and not with a knife. If the bird was hullin (non-sacred), then nipping it is an improper means to slaughter it (it must have its neck sliced). If he nips a bird sacrifice outside of the Temple it is invalid. In all of these cases, the bird is considered carrion and it does cause impurity if swallowed. The mishnah now lists other problems that will cause the bird to defile when its flesh is swallowed. When it comes to turtle-doves, they are valid as sacrifices only when they are older (about three months) whereas pigeons are valid as sacrifices when they are younger (before three months). So if he sacrificed a bird either before or after it reached majority, it causes impurity.
Furthermore, if the bird was missing a limb it cannot be used as a sacrifice. So if he nipped a bird that couldn’t be used as a sacrifice, it is completely invalid and does cause impurity.
Section three: The mishnah now provides the general rule. If a bird was valid as a sacrifice and it was nipped in the Temple, using the correct method for nipping, but then became disqualified for some reason, the bird does not cause impurity when its flesh is swallowed. 
However, if the bird was disqualified before it arrived at the Temple courtyard, or was disqualified because its nipping was not performed correctly, the bird is considered carrion and one who eats it becomes impure when its flesh is swallowed. 
Section four: If someone performs the nipping who is not allowed to do so (see mishnah 2:1), for instance a non-priest, or an impure priest, the nipping is invalid and the bird cannot be used as a sacrifice. However, it does not place the bird into the category of carrion because this is a case of unfitness that arose in sanctity. 

