Zevahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah One

Introduction
The fifth chapter of Zevahim is a well-known chapter of Mishnah, at least in traditional circles, because it is recited every morning before Shacharit, the morning prayer service. The chapter describes how the sacrifices were offered, where in the Temple, how many times the blood was sprinkled on the altar, and other various issues. The reason why this chapter was recited every morning was that its recitation was meant to take the place of the sacrifices which could no longer be offered after the Temple was destroyed.

Mishnah One
Which is the place [for the offering] of the sacrifices? 
Most holy sacrifices are slaughtered on the north [side of the altar]. 
The bullock and the goat of Yom Kippur are [done] at the north, and the receiving of their blood is [performed] with ministering vessels at the north, and their blood requires sprinkling between the poles [of the ark], on the curtain, and on the golden altar.
[The omission of] a single application of [the blood] invalidates [them]. 
He [the priest] would pour out the remainders of the blood on the western base of the outer altar, but if he did not pour it out, he did not invalidate [the sacrifice].

Explanation
Section one: This is a general clause that will be further expanded henceforth through mishnah five. The three most holy sacrifices are the hatat, the asham and the olah. 
Section two: These sacrifices are mentioned in Leviticus 16, the chapter that is read in the synagogue on Yom Kippur. The section gives basic instructions as to where these two sacrifices are offered and where their blood must be sprinkled. When sprinkling the blood the high priest would stand between the poles of the ark and sprinkle the blood on the poles, on the veil in the sanctuary and on the golden altar which also stood in the sanctuary. For more detailed information, see Yoma 5:3-6. 
Section three: Every application of the blood must be executed and the omission of a single one of them invalidates these two sacrifices.
Section four: The mishnah instructs the priest to pour the blood out on the base of the altar. If he doesn’t do so, or doesn’t do so in a proper manner, the sacrifice is still valid. 


