Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who “nips,” or slaughters a bird inside or outside the Temple and offers it up outside. As a reminder “nipping,” plucking off the head from the back of the neck, was the way that bird sacrifices were slaughtered inside the Temple, whereas slaughtering, slicing the neck with a knife, was how they were slaughtered outside the Temple, to be eaten not as a sacrifice. 
 
Mishnah Seven 
If one nips a bird [offering] inside and offers it up outside, he is liable; 
If one nips it outside and offers it up outside, he is exempt.   
If one slaughters a bird inside and offers it up outside, he is exempt.  
If one slaughters [it] outside and offers [it] up outside, he is liable.  
Thus its prescribed rite inside exempts him [if he does it] outside, while its prescribed rite outside exempts him [if he does it] inside. 
Rabbi Shimon says: whatever he is liable for outside, he is liable in similar circumstances inside when one [subsequently] offers it up outside; except when one slaughters [a bird] inside and offers [it] up outside. 

Explanation
Section one: Inside the Temple a bird is slaughtered by nipping. Therefore, if he nips it inside the Temple he has slaughtered it correctly. When he then brings it outside the Temple and offers it up there, he is liable because he has offered a valid sacrifice outside of the Temple.
Section two: However, if he nips it outside, he has disqualified it from being a valid sacrifice and when he offers it up outside he is not liable.
Section three: Slaughtering it inside the Temple also disqualifies it from being a sacrifice and thus when he offers it up outside he is exempt.
Section four: Slaughtering is the proper way to kill the bird outside the Temple. So if he slaughters it and then offers it outside the Temple he is liable.
Section five: We now get a summary, which may also serve as a type of mnemonic device. If one kills the bird outside the Temple with the rite prescribed for inside, that is nipping, he is exempt. Similarly, if one kills the bird inside the Temple with the rite prescribed for outside, that is slaughtering with the knife, he is exempt. 
Section six: Rabbi Shimon holds that one who nips outside the Temple and then offers it up outside the Temple is liable. He then adds a rule that any time one is liable for an act when done outside the Temple, he is also liable if done inside and then offered up outside the Temple. The one exception is one who slaughters an animal inside and then offers it up outside. One who does this is exempt even though if he slaughtered it outside and offered it up there he would be liable. Rabbi Shimon disagrees with Rabbi Yose the Galilean in mishnah one of our chapter, who holds that one who slaughters outside the Temple and offers it up outside the Temple is exempt, whereas one who slaughters inside the Temple and offers it up outside is liable. Rabbi Shimon holds that since he is exempt when done outside, he is also exempt when done inside.
I should note that Rabbi Shimon’s words are exceedingly difficult. I have explained them according to Albeck’s commentary.   

