Zevahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
The sacrifices of non-Jews: one is not liable on their account for piggul, remnant, or defilement, and if [a priest] slaughters them outside [the Temple], he is not liable, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But Rabbi Yose declares him liable.
The things for which one is not liable on account of piggul, one is liable on account of remnant and defilement except blood. 
Rabbi Shimon declares one liable for anything which is normally eaten, but for wood, frankincense and incense, one is not liable for [transgressions involving] defilement.

Explanation
Section one: Non-Jews may bring sacrifices to the Temple, and this probably was not altogether an uncommon occurrence in the Second Temple period.  Rabbi Meir says that the laws concerning piggul, remnant, defilement and the prohibition of slaughtering a sacrifice outside of the Temple do not apply to these sacrifices. What this means is that if someone has an improper intent while offering this sacrifice, and then someone eats the meat, the one who ate the meat is not liable for karet, as he would be had the sacrifice been brought by a Jew. The same holds true if the sacrifice is left over, or if someone eats it while impure. While doing so is prohibited, one who does so is not liable for karet, according to Rabbi Meir.
Rabbi Yose says that the same laws that govern sacrifices brought by Jews also govern sacrifices brought by non-Jews and that one who eats from such a sacrifice would be liable for karet. 
Section two: This section refers to the list found in mishnah three above. For all of those things, while the laws of piggul don’t apply, the laws of remnant and defilement do apply. Thus if one eats one of them after the time has elapsed, he is liable for transgressing the laws of remnant, and if one eats one of them while impure, he has violated the prohibition of eating holy things while impure. The one exception is blood—one who eats blood has violated the prohibition of eating blood, but he has not violated other prohibitions.
Rabbi Shimon disagrees and holds that for anything that is normally eaten, one can violate the prohibitions of eating it while defiled. This would apply to the fistful of the minhah offering, the priests’ minhah offering and other edible things found in the list in mishnah three. However, if one eats or burns inedible things, such as wood or incense, while impure, he is not liable. The sages disagree and hold that he is liable for violating the prohibition of impurity in such cases as well. 

