Zevahim, Chapter Nine, Mishnah One

Introduction
Exodus 29:37 states, “Whatever touches the altar shall become sanctified.” From this verse the rabbis learn that once certain things have been put on the altar they may not be taken back down, even if they were invalidated from being fit sacrifices. In today’s mishnah there is a debate over how far this rule extends: i.e. what things can be taken off the altar once they have been put on, and what things may not.

Mishnah One
The altar sanctifies whatever is eligible for it.   
Rabbi Joshua says: whatever is eligible for the altar fire does not descend once it has ascended, as it is said, “The olah itself shall remain where it is burned upon the altar [all night until morning, while the fire of the altar is kept going on it]” (Leviticus 6:2): just as the olah, which is eligible for the altar fire, does not descend once it has ascended, so whatever is eligible for the altar fire does not descend once it ascended. 
Rabbi Gamaliel said: whatever is eligible for the altar does not descend once it ascended, as it is said: “The olah itself shall remain where it is burned upon the altar [all night until morning, while the fire of the altar is kept going on it]” (Leviticus 6:2): just as the olah, which is eligible for the altar, does not descend once it ascended, so whatever is eligible for the altar does not descend once it ascended. 
The only difference between Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Joshua is in respect of the blood and libations, for Rabban Gamaliel says that they cannot descend, while Rabbi Joshua says that they can descend.   
Rabbi  Shimon says: if the sacrifice is fit while the libations [which accompanied it] are unfit; or if the libations are fit while the sacrifice is unfit; or even if both are unfit, — the sacrifice does not descend, while the libations do descend.

Explanation
Section one: The altar sanctifies anything that is “eligible” for it, even if that thing became unfit. Thus if an animal that was fit (such as a sheep) became unfit and the animal is put up onto the altar, it cannot subsequently be removed.
Section two: Rabbi Joshua limits this rule to that which is eligible for the altar’s fire, meaning things that are burned. As we shall see below in section four, this does not include blood and libations, which are not burned on the altar and therefore can be taken down once they have been put onto the altar. Rabbi Joshua understands the words “eligible for it” in section one to refer to that which is eligible for the fires of the altar, and not just eligible to be put up onto the altar.
Section three: Rabban Gamaliel expands the rule to include anything that can be put on the altar, including libations and blood. Once one of these has been put on the altar, it cannot be taken back down.
Section four: As explained above, the difference between Rabbi Joshua and Rabban Gamaliel is with regard to blood and libations which are not burned. All other matter that is eligible for the altar is burned and therefore all agree that it is not taken down. 
Section five: Rabbi Shimon distinguishes between libations that accompany a sacrifice (see 4:3) and libations that are put on the altar without a sacrifice. If the libations accompany a sacrifice, then in all cases, regardless of whether the sacrifice is valid and the libations are invalid, vice versa or even both are invalid, the sacrifice stays on the altar and the libations can be taken down. This is like Rabbi Joshua. In contrast, in a case where the libations are put alone on the altar, they remain there even if they become unfit. 

