Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah One

Introduction
Chapter thirteen deals with the prohibition of slaughtering and offering sacrifices outside of the Temple. This prohibition is found in Leviticus 17 which reads:

Leviticus 17:2-9  2 Speak to Aaron and his sons and to all the Israelite people and say to them: This is what the LORD has commanded:  3 if anyone of the house of Israel slaughters an ox or sheep or goat in the camp, or does so outside the camp,  4 and does not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting to present it as an offering to the LORD, before the LORD's Tabernacle, bloodguilt shall be imputed to that man: he has shed blood; that man shall be cut off from among his people...  8 Say to them further: If anyone of the house of Israel or of the strangers who reside among them offers a burnt offering or a sacrifice,  9 and does not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting to offer it to the LORD, that person shall be cut off from his people.

Note that the verses prohibit slaughtering (verse 3) and offering (verse 9). The punishment for intentionally transgressing either of these prohibitions is karet, which is translated here as “cut off from his people.” According to the rabbis, any sin which is punished with karet when done intentionally, is atoned for with a sin-offering, a hatat, when done unwittingly. Our mishnah deals with how many hatats a person would be liable for if he unwittingly slaughters and offers a sacrifice outside of the Temple. 

Mishnah One
He who slaughters and offers up outside [the Temple courtyard] is liable in respect of slaughtering and in respect of offering.  
Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: if he slaughtered inside and offered up outside, [he is liable]; if he slaughtered outside and offered up outside, he is not liable [for offering up], because he offered up only that which was unfit.  
They said to him: even when one slaughters inside and offers up outside, since he carries it out, he renders it unfit.  

Explanation
Section one: If one unwittingly slaughters and then offers a sacrifice outside of the Temple courtyard he is liable to bring two hatats—one for slaughtering and one for offering it up.
Section two: Rabbi Yose the Galilean says that one is liable for offering outside the Temple only if he slaughtered it inside. If he slaughtered the animal outside and then offered it up outside he would be liable for only one hatat, since by the time he offered it up, it was already unfit by having been slaughtered outside. Rabbi Yose would read verse 3 as prohibiting slaughtering outside the Temple and verse 9 as saying that even if he slaughtered inside, where one is allowed to slaughter, he is punished for offering outside. Verse 9’s punishment for offering up does not apply if verse 3’s prohibition of slaughtering outside was already transgressed.
Section three: The rabbis reject his argument, claiming that even if he slaughters it inside and then carries it outside, he is still offering up something that is unfit. In other words, there is no way to offer up a fit sacrifice outside the Temple because as soon as it leaves the Temple it is unfit. Nevertheless, verse 9 punishes one who offers a sacrifice outside the Temple. The only conclusion is that this verse is applicable even if the sacrifice was already disqualified. Thus he must bring two hatats—one for slaughtering and one for offering. 

