Zevahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
The last mishnah of our chapter is concerned with the three remaining sacrifices of lower sanctity—the first-born animal, the tithe and the pesah. 

Mishnah Eight
The first-born animal, tithe and the pesah are sacrifices of lesser sanctity. 
They are slaughtered in any part of the Temple court, and their blood requires one sprinkling, provided that he applies it against the base [of the altar].   
They differ in the [rules governing] their eating: 
The first-born animal is eaten by priests [only], the tithe is eaten by anyone and they can be eaten in any part of the city, prepared in any manner, during two days and one night. 
The pesah can be eaten only at night, only until midnight, and it can be eaten only by those registered for it, and it can be eaten only when roasted. 

Explanation
Section two: These sacrifices require only one sprinkling of blood. This is derived from the fact that Numbers 18:17 says concerning the first-born animal, “and the blood you shall sprinkle on the altar” and it doesn’t say “around the altar” as it says regarding other sacrifices. This one sprinkling must be applied a section of the altar that has a base. There was no base (Hebrew: yesod) to the altar on the east or south sides, so this blood sprinkling had to be done on the north or west sides.
Section three: The rules concerning eating these three sacrifices differ, and therefore each must be discussed individually.
Section four: The first-born is given to the priests and can be eaten only by them (and also their households). These are the same rules that govern the breast and thigh of other sacrifices. See Numbers 18:18. In contrast, the tithe can be eaten by anyone. 
Both of these sacrifices can be eaten anywhere in Jerusalem. They can be prepared in any manner and they can be eaten with the same time limitations as the shelamim, meaning the day they are slaughtered, the night that follows and the entire following day. 
Section five: The pesah is different in many ways. First of all, it can be eaten only on the night following the day on which it was slaughtered (see Exodus 12:8). This is the night on which we now observe the seder. That night it can only be eaten until midnight. We should note that there was some debate among the rabbis concerning this—see Pesahim 10:9. Some rabbis held that it could be eaten until the following morning, but that one should try to eat it before midnight. In order for a person to eat a pesah he had to be registered for it. What this means is that before it is slaughtered the people who intend to eat it must inform the slaughterer of their intention. A person could not register for two pesah sacrifices. Finally, the pesah must be fully roasted—it can’t be boiled or cooked using any water.   

