Zevahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today’s mishnah teaches details concerning the asham and the public shelamim sacrifices.

Mishnah Five
The shelamim of the public and the ashams:
These are the[different types of] ashams: 
The asham for robbery; 
The asham or illegal use of holy property;   
The asham for a betrothed maidservant;   
A nazirite's asham;   
A leper's asham;   
And the suspended asham.
These are slaughtered in the north, and their blood is received in a service vessel in the north, and their blood requires two sprinklings, which constitute four. 
And they are eaten within the curtains [of the Tabernacle], by male priests, prepared in any manner, the same day and night, until midnight.

Explanation
Section one: This mishnah will deal mostly with different types of ashams, but it also deals with the shelamim offering of the public, which consists of two sheep offered on behalf of the entire congregation of Israel on Shavuot. See Leviticus 23:19. Other types of shelamim have different rules and we shall deal with them below in mishnah seven.
Section two: There are six different types of ashams. I shall briefly explain each one and provide biblical reference:
The asham for robbery: This is brought by one who swore that he had not stolen something, and then confessed to his crime. See Leviticus 5:25 and Mishnah Shevuot 5:1.  
The asham for illegal use of holy property: Someone who makes personal use of holy property, such as something that was dedicated to the Temple, must bring an asham to atone for his sin. See Leviticus 5:15.  
For a betrothed maidservant: This is brought by a man who sleeps with a maidservant betrothed to another man. See Leviticus 19:20-21. We will deal more extensively with this passage when we get to tractate Keritot 2:5.  
A nazirite's asham: Brought by a nazirite who had come into contact with a dead body. See Numbers 6:12.   
A leper's asham: Brought by the leper (one with some sort of skin affliction) when he has recovered from his disease. See Leviticus 14:12.   
And the suspended asham: This is brought by a person who is not sure if he transgressed a prohibition for which a hatat is usually brought. He would bring this asham and then if he found out later that he had sinned, he would have to bring a hatat. In that sense this asham “suspends” for the punishment is suspended until it is determined whether a transgression has been committed. See Leviticus 5:17-18.
Section three: The rules here are the same as those concerning the sprinkling of the blood of the olah above in mishnah four.
Section four: These sacrifices can be eaten. The same rules that applied to the hatat (see mishnah three) apply to the asham and to the public shelamim. 


