Zevahim, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah continues to deal with sacrifices offered “not for their own name”, meaning in order for them to be different from what they were supposed to be.

Mishnah Two
Yose ben Honi says: [Sacrifices] slaughtered in the name of a pesah or a hatat are invalid.  
Shimon the brother of Azariah says: if one slaughtered them under a higher designation than their own they are valid; under a lower designation than their own, they are invalid. 
How so? If one slaughtered most sacred sacrifices under the designation of lesser sacrifices, they are invalid; [but] if one slaughtered lesser sacrifices under the designation of most sacred sacrifices, they are valid. 
If one slaughtered a bekhor or a tithe in the name of a shelamim, it is valid, but if one slaughtered a shelamim in the name of a bekhor or tithe, it is invalid.

Explanation
Section one: Yose ben Honi points out the mirror image rule to that which we learned in yesterday’s mishnah. There we learned that if a pesah or a hatat were offered with the wrong intent, they are disqualified. Here we learn that if a different sacrifice is offered with the intent of its being a pesah or a hatat it is disqualified. Concerning the pesah, this must be on the fourteenth of Nissan, the only day that the pesah can be offered. The hatat rule is true any time.
Section two: Shimon the brother of Azariah (an unusual way of referring to someone) has a different rule. The sacrifices are divided into two main groups—most sacred sacrifices (hatat, asham and olah) and lesser sacrifices (shelamim, pesah, bekhor and tithe). If the sacrifice is a lesser sacrifice and it is offered with the intent of its being a higher sacrifice then it is valid. However, if it is a most sacred sacrifice and it is offered with the intent of it being a lesser sacrifice, then it is invalid because he has reduced its sanctity. 
Section three: Technically, the bekhor (firstling), the tithe and shelamim are all lesser sacrifices. However, we see here that the sanctity of the bekhor and the tithe is actually lower than that of the shelamim. Thus if a priest offers a bekhor or tithe (lesser sanctity) in order for it to be a shelamim, then the sacrifice is valid (and can be eaten) because he has raised its sanctity. But if he offers a shelamim with the thought that it is a tithe or bekhor, then it is invalid. 


