Zevahim, Chapter Twelve, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah discusses who receives the hides of different types of sacrifices.

Mishnah Three
The hides of less holy sacrifices belong to their owners. 
The hides of most holy sacrifices belong to the priest. This is a kal vehomer: if with an olah, even though they do not acquire its flesh they do acquire its hide, is it not logical that they acquire the hides of most holy sacrifices, when they do acquire their flesh? 
The altar does not refute [this argument], for it does not acquire the hide in any instance. 

Explanation
Section one: The Torah states that the hide of an olah goes to the priests. Since the olah is a most holy sacrifice (as is the hatat and the asham), the rabbis extrapolate that the hides of all most holy sacrifices go to the priests, as we shall see below. But when it comes to the hides of less holy sacrifices, such as the shelamim, the todah, the tithe and the first-born, they go to those who bring these sacrifices.
Section two: While the Torah states that the hides of the olah go to the priest, the rabbis expand this to include all most holy sacrifices. The argument is a kal vehomer argument, which roughly translates as an “all the more so” type of argument. If the priests receive the hide even when they don’t receive the flesh, as is the case with the olah, all the more so they receive the hide when they do receive the flesh, as is the case with the asham and hatat.
Section three: In order to refute a kal vehomer argument, what one must do is show that the relationship between the two things being discussed is not stable. In our case, the mishnah tried to claim that the relationship between hide and flesh is stable—whenever one receives the flesh, he receives the hide. However, the altar could seemingly prove the opposite—the altar receives the flesh and doesn’t receive the hide. Therefore, we could say that the priests receive the flesh of most holy sacrifices but they don’t receive the hide. The mishnah rejects this argument because the altar never receives the hide, unlike the priests who do receive the hide of the olah. In other words, we reason the kal vehomer argument from the fact that the priests do receive the hide of the olah and therefore they also receive the hide of other most holy sacrifices, and not from some general argument that any time someone receives the flesh, he also receives the hide.   

