Zevahim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah begins to deal with bird offerings. There are two types of bird offerings: the hatat and the olah.

Mishnah Two
The hatat of a bird was sacrificed by the southwest horn [of the altar]. 
It is valid [if done] in any place, but this was its [particular] place.   
That horn served for three things below, and three things above:
Below: for the hatat of the bird, 
For the presenting [of meal-offerings].   
And for the residue of the blood.   
Above: for the pouring out of wine and water, and for the olah of a bird when there was too much on the east.

Explanation
Section one: The sacrifice of a bird consists of plucking off its head and then sprinkling its blood on the altar. These were both done on the southwest horn (or corner) of the altar.
Section two: The mishnah notes that this is where the bird hatat was supposed to be done, but it didn’t have to be done there. If it was done elsewhere it is still valid.
Section three: There were six sacrificial actions performed on this corner of the altar, three of which were performed above the crimson line in the middle of the altar and three below. 
The bird hatat, the main topic of our mishnah, was performed below the line. The minhah (meal) offerings were presented, meaning drawn near, to the altar, at this corner, below the line. Also, the residue of the blood from animal sacrifices was poured out on the southern base (yesod) at this corner (see above 5:3).
Section four: There were three actions above the line at this corner. The first two are the libations, liquids poured out onto the altar. There are two such libations. The water libation which occurs only on Sukkot (see Sukkah 4:9) and the wine libation, which was done frequently as an accompaniment to animal sacrifices. In addition, usually the bird olah was done on the southeastern corner of the altar. But if there were too many bird olahs and the southeastern corner became busy, they would offer the extra on the southwestern corner.    
