Zevahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with sacrifices that become mixed up with other animals. There are three possibilities in the mishnah for the type of animal the sacrifice is mixed up with: 
1) Animals that cannot be eaten or sacrificed.
2) Animals that can be eaten but not sacrificed.
3) Animals that can be sacrificed or eaten. 
 
Mishnah One
All sacrifices which became mixed up with hatats that must be left to die, or with an ox that is to be stoned, even one in ten thousand, all must be left to die. 
If they were mixed up with: 
an ox with which a transgression had been committed [for instance]: 
one that had killed a man on the testimony of one witness or of its owner; 
or [an ox] that had sexual relations with a woman or one with whom a man had sexual relations;  
or an animal set aside [for idolatry], or that had been worshipped [as an idol]; 
or that was the fee of a whore, or [a dog's] exchange; 
or that was kilayim; 
or terefah; 
or an animal born through the caesarean section,
[In all of these cases] they must graze until they become defected, then they are sold, and one brings [a sacrifice] of the same kind at the price of the better of them.  
If they were mixed up with unblemished [animals] of hullin, the hullin must be sold to those who need that kind [for a sacrifice].

Explanation
Section one: To understand this clause we need to explain what a hatat is that must be left to die. There are five categories of this type of problematic hatat, cases where for some reason the hatat cannot be sacrificed and all that can be done with it is let it die. We shall learn more about this when we learn Tractate Temurah. If a valid sacrifice becomes mixed up with a hatat that must be left to die, then all of the animals that are mixed up must be left to die. The same is true if it is mixed up with an ox that has been condemned to be stoned for either killing a person or for having sexual relations with a person. In both of these cases, none of the animals mixed up can be sacrificed, even if one forbidden hatat becomes mixed up with 10,000 valid ones. 
Section two: If the sacrifice is mixed up with another animal that cannot be sacrificed, then the animals should graze until they become defected [and thereby unfit for sacrifice], then they can all be sold and the proceeds from the better of them (or the best if there were more than two) must be used to buy a sacrifice of the same kind that was originally mixed in. 
The mishnah now lists possible ways for a sacrifice to become invalid. The first is that it transgresses or a transgression is committed with it. An animal that kills a human being must be executed and its meat is forbidden, but only if there are two witnesses to the killing. If there is one witness the animal cannot be sacrificed but it can be slaughtered and then eaten. Similarly, an animal that has sexual relations with a human being must be executed but only if there are two witnesses. If there is only one witness it is forbidden to sacrifice the animal but not for people to eat it. The next two categories are animals that were involved in idolatry. If there is only one witness, the animals are only prohibited as sacrifices. 
According to Deuteronomy 23:19 one may not bring “the fee of a whore or the pay of a dog into the house of the Lord.” The rabbis understand these two things to be an animal used to pay a prostitute or an ox used as payment for a dog. Neither of them can be used as a sacrifice. 
An animal born from mixed parentage, such as a ram and a ewe, cannot be sacrificed, although it can be eaten. 
The mishnah here lists a terefah, an animal who after having been slaughtered is found to have a defect that would have caused it to die. A terefah cannot be eaten, so commentators explain that this refers to the offspring of a terefah, which according to some opinions, cannot be sacrificed. 
An animal born through cesarean section also cannot be sacrificed, although it can be eaten. 
In all of these cases the animal cannot be used as a sacrifice but it can be eaten. Therefore, if one of these is mixed up with a sacrificial animal, they do not have to let the animals die, as was the case in the previous clause.
Section three: If the sacrifice was mixed up with unblemished non-sacred animals, then all of the animals can be sold to people who need such animals as sacrifices and then they will all eventually be used as sacrifices.  
   
