Zevahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction
In this mishnah we find an extended argument between Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua concerning whether or not one who derives benefit from a bird olah that was sacrificed as a hatat has “trespassed”. As we learned in yesterday’s mishnah, trespassing means making illegal use of Temple property. This topic is interesting (at least to the sages) because an olah does involve trespass, but a hatat does not. 
This mishnah is a bit complicated but I hope that you will appreciate the glimpse we get here of the types of logical arguments employed by the sages.
   
Mishnah Four
If one offered an olah of a bird below [the red line] with the rites of a hatat [and] in the name of a hatat: 
Rabbi Eliezer says: it involves trespass.
But Rabbi Joshua says: it does not involve trespass.   
Rabbi Eliezer said: if a hatat which does not involve trespass when he offers it for its own name, nevertheless when he changes the name [for which it is offered] it does involve trespass, is it not logical that an olah which does involve trespass when he offers it for its own name, would involve trespass when he changes its name?   
Rabbi Joshua said to him: No, when you speak of a hatat whose name he changed to that of an olah, [it involves trespass] because he changed its name to something that involves trespass; will you say [the same] of an olah whose name he changed to that of a hatat, seeing that he changed its name to something which does not involve trespass?  
Rabbi Eliezer said to him: Behold, most holy sacrifices which he slaughtered in the south and which he slaughtered in the name of lesser sacrifices will prove the matter, for he changed their name to something which does not involve trespass, and yet they involve trespass, so too, do not be surprised that in the case of the olah, although he changed its name to something that does not involve trespass, it still involves trespass. 
Rabbi Joshua said: No, when you speak of most holy sacrifices which are slaughtered in the south and in the name of lesser sacrifices, [they involve trespass] because he changed their name to something which is partly forbidden and partly permitted; will you say the same of an olah, where he changed its name to something that is altogether permitted? 

Explanation 
Section one: This section lays out the two opinions. Rabbi Eliezer says that this olah, sacrificed in the name of a hatat with the rites of a hatat still involves trespass, as does every olah. Rabbi Joshua says that just as a bird hatat doesn’t involve trespass (because it is entirely edible for priests) so too this olah that was sacrificed as a hatat does not involve trespass. 
Section two: Rabbi Eliezer now begins to prove his opinion by comparing the wrongly sacrificed olah with a wrongly sacrificed hatat. When someone sacrifices a hatat in the right way, it does not involve trespass, because it can be eaten by priests. However, when he offers it as an olah it does involve trespass. All the more so, Rabbi Eliezer argues, with an olah. If it involves trespass when it is offered for its own sake, all the more so it should involve trespass when it is offered for the sake of something else.
Section three: Rabbi Joshua responds that a hatat that he offered for the sake of an olah involves trespass because he changed it to a sacrifice that involves trespass (the olah). However, in the case of our mishnah, when he offered the olah for the sake of a hatat, he changed it to something that doesn’t involve trespass (the hatat). Therefore, this olah offered as a hatat does not involve trespass. Digging a bit deeper into the meaning of this debate, we might say that Rabbi Joshua accords greater power to the intention of the sacrificer—when he changes something into a hatat it is a hatat and the rules regarding an olah no longer apply. In contrast, according to Rabbi Eliezer, if it was supposed to be an olah it stays an olah, no matter what his intention.
Section four: Rabbi Eliezer responds by noting that there is a case where a person changes something from a type of sacrifice that does involve trespass to a type that does not involve trespass and yet the sacrifice still involves trespass. If one sacrifices a most holy sacrifice as if it were a less holy sacrifice which does not involve trespass, the sacrifice still involves trespass. This simply proves that what Rabbi Joshua said in section two was incorrect.
Section five: Rabbi Joshua responds that in the case of most holy sacrifices which were offered as if they were less holy sacrifices, he has changed it into something that has both prohibited and permitted parts. When it comes to less holy sacrifices, some parts can be eaten, whereas some of the inner parts of the animal cannot be eaten and do involve trespass. Therefore, in this case the sacrifice still involves trespass because he changed it into something that at least partially involves trespass. However, in the case of the bird olah sacrificed as a bird hatat, he changed the sacrifice into something that doesn’t involve trespass at all. This defends Rabbi Joshua’s opinion that a bird olah offered as a bird hatat doesn’t involve trespass.   

