Zevahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
As we have learned, piggul is something that was sacrificed with the intent of eating or burning it outside of its appropriate time. In today’s mishnah we learn that certain items are not liable for piggul, meaning that if one eats or burns these items he cannot be liable for having eaten piggul (although they may nevertheless be prohibited for other reasons). 
The general rule concerning when one is liable for piggul and when one is exempt is found at the end of the mishnah. Piggul is only applicable to an item if something else permits that item to be eaten or burned. For instance, the flesh of a sacrifice can be eaten once its blood has been sprinkled on the altar. Therefore, if one eats the flesh after the sacrifice was offered with improper intent, he has transgressed the violation of piggul. Some items “permit themselves” and to these items, piggul does not apply. 
 
Mishnah Three
These are the things for which one is not liable on account of piggul: 
The fistful, 
The incense, 
The frankincense,
The priests’ meal-offering, 
The anointed priest's meal-offering, 
The minhah with libation
The blood, 
The libations that are brought separately, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
The sages say: also those that are brought with an animal [sacrifice].  
The log  of oil brought by the metzora: 
Rabbi Shimon says: one is not liable on account of piggul;  
But Rabbi Meir says: one is liable on account of piggul,
because the blood of the asham makes it permitted and whatever has something else that makes it permitted,  whether for man or for the altar, one is liable on its account for piggul.

Explanation
Section one: The “fistful” is the fistful of flour that the priest puts on the altar from the minhah, or meal-offering. If he grabs this fistful with the intent of eating it outside the proper time, or of burning it outside of its time, the minhah offering is piggul. However, one who eats the fistful taken from the minhah offering has not transgressed piggul for the fistful permits the minhah to be eaten, but the fistful permits itself, and one who eats something that permits itself has not violated piggul. 
Section two: The incense that is put on the altar with the “fistful” (see Leviticus 2:2). The same rules that apply to the fistful apply to it as well.
Section three: The frankincense offering referred to in Exodus 30:7-8. The case here is one in which a person, while bringing the frankincense to the altar to turn it into smoke thought that he would burn it on the next day. One who then eats such frankincense, has not transgressed piggul.
Section four: The priests’ entire minhnah offering is burned on the altar (Leviticus 6:16). There is no fistful taken from it that permits it to be eaten or burned. Therefore, it “permits itself” and the laws of piggul do not apply.
Section five: The high priest would bring a minhah offering everyday (Leviticus 6:15). It too is entirely burned.
Section six: This refers to a minhah offering that a person volunteers to bring (Numbers 15:2ff). 
Section seven: The blood permits the sacrifice to be eaten, but nothing permits it. One who eats this blood is liable for eating blood, but not for the violation of piggul.
Section eight: This refers to a minhah brought with a libation but not with an accompanying animal sacrifice, for the sacrifice was offered on the previous day. According to Rabbi Meir, this minhah permits itself and does not permit the sacrifice (the blood permits the sacrifice). Therefore, in such a case, the minhah is not piggul, even if the animal was. However, according to Rabbi Meir, if the minhah was brought with the animal sacrifice, and the animal becomes piggul (offered with improper intent), then the minhah also becomes piggul. The other rabbis disagree and hold that the minhah offering cannot become piggul even when it accompanies an animal sacrifice. The minhah offering is independent from the animal offering and even if the animal becomes piggul, the minhah does not.
Section nine: See Leviticus 14:10. This log (a measure) of oil is offered by the metzora (one who had some type of skin disease) upon becoming pure. It accompanies an asham sacrifice. According to Rabbi Shimon, if the asham becomes piggul, the oil does not because the sacrifice does not “permit” the oil, rather the oil permits itself. Rabbi Meir holds that the asham does permit the oil to be put on the ear and thumb/big toe of the metzora and therefore it is something that other things permit and it can become piggul. If the sacrifice is offered with the wrong intent, then the oil becomes piggul and one who eats it would be liable.  
Section ten: This is the general rule that underlies the entire mishnah.    
