Zevahim, Chapter Thirteen, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with the prohibition of offering a sacrifice outside of the Temple. 

Mishnah Four
In regard to both valid sacrifices or invalid sacrifices which had become unfit within [the Temple]: if one offers them outside, he is liable.  
If one offers up outside [the Temple] as much as an olive’s worth of an olah and its innards [combined], he is liable.
As for the fistful [of flour], the frankincense, the incense, the priests’ meal-offering, the anointed priest’s meal-offering, and the meal offering of libations, if [one] offered up as much as an olive of one of these outside, he is liable. 
But Rabbi Elazar exempts him unless he offers up the whole of them.  
In all of these cases, if they offered them within, and left over an olive’s worth and one offered it outside, he is liable.  
In all of these cases, if they became lacking something, and one offered them outside, he is not liable.  

Explanation
Section one: One is liable for offering up outside of the Temple either a valid sacrifice or an invalid sacrifice that had been invalidated while it was in the Temple. The rule with regard to such sacrifices is that if they are put on the altar they do not come down (see 9:2). However, if one offers up a sacrifice that had been disqualified outside of the Temple, one that if put up on the altar would have to be taken down, he is not liable.
Section two: In order to be liable for offering up a sacrifice outside the Temple, one must offer up at least an olive’s worth of flesh. The mishnah rules that when offering an olah, a sacrifice that is wholly burned, the flesh and the innards, which are always burned for every sacrifice, add up together. Assumedly, in a sacrifice that is partially eaten, the parts that are eaten would not be combined with the parts that are normally burned, in order to add up to the requisite olive’s worth.
Section three: All of the types of sacrifices listed in this section were explained in 4:3. They are all completely burned on the altar, without any of their parts being eaten by priests or non-priests. According to the first opinion, even though they are completely burned, if one offers up even a part of them outside of the Temple, he is liable. Rabbi Elazar disagrees and holds that just as they must be completely burned on the altar if done properly, so too in order for one to be liable for offering them outside the Temple, they must be completely offered.
Section four: Rabbi Elazar, however, agrees that if most of one of the above-mentioned things is offered on the altar, and then an olive’s worth is left over and offered outside the Temple, that one is liable. Since this olive’s worth completes the offering of the sacrifice, one is liable for offering it up outside.
Section five: The sacrifices in section three must be completely offered for them to be valid. Therefore, if even the smallest part of them is missing and one offers it up outside the Temple, he is not liable. In other words, since this would not have been valid had it been offered on the altar, it doesn’t make one liable if offered outside.    
