Zevahim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
In this mishnah Rabbi Shimon points out how one could identify what type of oil is being divided up by the priests in the Temple courtyard and what type of oil is being burned in order to remove it.

Mishnah Eight
Rabbi Shimon said: if you see oil being divided in the Temple courtyard, you don’t need to ask what it is for, for it is the remnant of oil of the wafers of the Israelite’s meal-offerings, or of the metzora’s log of oil.   
If you see oil being poured on to the fires, you don’t need not ask what it is for, for it is the remnant of the oil of the wafers of priests’ meal-offerings, or of the anointed priest's meal-offering; for one cannot voluntarily offer offer oil [alone].   
Rabbi Tarfon say: oil can be voluntarily offered [alone].

Explanation
Section one: The extra oil used to anoint the meal offering brought by an Israelite goes to the priests. The “wafers of the Israelite’s meal-offerings” refers to a type of meal offering that is either brought as loaves soaked with oil or as wafers that have been dabbed with oil (see Leviticus 2:4: we will learn a lot more about the meal-offering, the minhah, in tractate Menahot). The remnant of the oil brought by the metzora (a person afflicted with scale disease, see Leviticus 14:15) also belongs to the priest. This oil is brought in a vessel and used among other things to anoint the metzora. What is leftover, the priest gets to keep.
Section two: Rabbi Shimon now explains what oil doesn’t go to the priest and instead is poured out onto the altar. If the priest is bringing the minhah (meal) offering, then neither he nor any other priest gets to keep the oil. All of this meal offering, and all of the oil, is burned. 
The high priest (the anointed priest) offers a minhah offering every day. The remnant of this oil does not go to the priests, but rather is burned..
A person cannot voluntarily offer just oil. Therefore, any oil that one sees in the Temple being either divided up among the priests or burned on the altar cannot come from a voluntary offering. This line comes to explain how one knows that the oil being divided up among the priests or burned on the altar is not from a voluntary offering—oil simply cannot be brought alone as a voluntary offering.
Section three: Rabbi Tarfon disagrees and holds that oil can be brought as an individual offering. Therefore, if one sees oil being divided or burned it might also come from such an offering.       

