Zevahim, Chapter Ten, Mishnah One

Introduction
The principle that whatever is more frequent takes precedence is determinative only when there is a set frequency to a given sacrifice. Most sacrifices are offered whenever a person needs to bring one without a determined frequency. Therefore, there is a different principle as to which takes precedence. 

Mishnah One
Whatever is more sacred than another precedes the other. 
The blood of a hatat precedes the blood of a olah, because it propitiates.   
The limbs of a olah precede the innards of a hatat, because it [the former] is entirely for the fires [of the altar]. 
A hatat precedes an asham, because its blood is sprinkled on the four horns and on the base.   
An asham precedes a today and a nazirite’s ram, because it is a most holy sacrifice. 
A todah and a nazirite's ram precede a shelamim, because they are eaten one day [only] and require [the accompaniment of] loaves. 
A shelamim precedes a firstling, because it requires four [blood] applications and laying [of hands], libations, and the waving of the breast and the thigh.

Explanation
Section one: The principle invoked here is that whatever is more sacred is offered first. As we shall see below, there are different ways of determining what is more sacred. 
Section two: If a priest has to sprinkle blood from a hatat and blood from an olah, he first sprinkles the blood from the hatat because the hatat propitiates (atones) for sin, whereas an olah does not have that function. Here we see that sanctity is determined by what a sacrifice does—the greater effect it has, the greater its sanctity.
Section three: An olah is completely burned, whereas parts of the hatat are eaten. This means, to the mishnah, that an olah is more sacred. Therefore, the parts of the olah that are burned take precedence over the parts of the hatat that have to be burned. 
Section four: A hatat is holier than an asham because it requires four full blood applications, whereas the asham requires only two that are four (they are applied on the corners. See above 5:3 and 5:5.
Section five: An asham is a most holy sacrifice and therefore it is offered before sacrifices of lesser sanctity such as the todah and the nazirite’s ram, brought at the end of the term of his naziriteship.
Section six: The shelamim is also a sacrifice of lesser sanctity. But the todah and nazirite’s ram can only be eaten for one day and night, whereas the shelamim can be eaten the next day and night. And when a todah or nazirite’s ram are brought, loaves accompany them. Here we see that more restrictions and more mitzvoth (loaves) implies greater sanctity.
Section seven: The first-born animal is also considered a lesser sacrifice. The shelamim is offered before it because the shelamim requires four blood applications. It requires the bringer to lay his hands on the animal. It is accompanied by wine libations and when it is offered, the breast and thigh are waved. The only one of these elements found in a firstling is laying of the hands. 
