Mishnah Rosh Hashanah
משנה ראש השנה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

The four new years are: On the first of Nisan, the new year for the kings and for the festivals; On the first of Elul, the new year for the tithing of animals; Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Shimon say, in the first of Tishrei. On the first of Tishrei, the new year for years, for the Sabbatical years and for the Jubilee years and for the planting and for the vegetables. On the first of Shevat, the new year for the trees, these are the words of the House of Shammai; The House of Hillel says, on the fifteenth thereof.
At four times the world is judged: On Pesach, for the crops. On Shavuot, for the fruits of the tree. On Rosh Hashnah, all the world passes before Him like sheep, as it says, "He that fashioneth the hearts of them all, that considereth all their doings." (Psalms 33:15) And on Sukkot, they are judged for the water.
On six months messengers go out: On Nisan, because of Pesach; On Av, because of the fast On Elul, because of Rosh Hashnanah; On Tishrei, to correct for the festivals On Kislev, because of Chanukah; On Adar, because of Purim; And when the Temple existed, they also went out on Iyar, because of the little Pesach.
On two months they desecrate the Shabbat, on Nisan and on Tishrei. For in those months, they were sent out to Syria to correct for the festivals. And when the Temple existed, they desecrated Shabbat in all of them-- To correct for the sacrifices.
Regardless of whether the moon was clearly visible or not clearly visible, They desecrate the Shabbat for it; Rabbi Yosei says: If it was clearly visible, they do not desecrate the Shabbat for it.
It happened once, that more than forty pair of witnesses passed through on the Sabbath, when R. Akivah detained them at Lydda [‏לוד‎]; Rabbon Gamaliel then sent word, saying, "If thou thus detainest the people, thou wilt be the cause of their straying in future" [they will refuse to come].
When father and son have seen the new moon, they must both go to the tribunal of judgment [Beth Din], not that they may be combined together to act as witnesses, but in order that, should the evidence of either of them be invalidated, the other may join to give evidence with another witness. R. Simeon says, "Father and son, and relatives in every degree, may be allowed as competent witnesses to give evidence as to the appearance of the new moon." R. José says, "It once happened that Tobias the physician, his son, and his freed slave, saw the new moon in Jerusalem, [and when they tendered their evidence] the priests accepted his evidence, and that of his son, but invalidated that of his freed slave; but when they appeared before the 'Beth Din,' they received his evidence, and that of his freed slave, but invalidated that of his son."
The following are considered incompetent witnesses: gamblers with dice, usurers, pigeon breeders, those who trade in the produce of the Sabbatical year, and also slaves. The rule is, that all evidence that cannot be received from a woman cannot be received from any of these.
A person who has seen the new moon, but is unable to go [to give evidence], must be brought [if unable to walk] mounted on an asses or even in a bed. Persons afraid of being waylaid by robbers may take sticks with them; and if they have a long way to go, it will be lawful for them to provide for themselves, and carry their food. Whenever [witnesses] must be a day and a night on the road, it will be lawful to profane the Sabbath to travel thereon, to give their evidence as to the appearance of the new moon. For thus is it written (Lev. 23:4), "These are the feasts of the Lord, the holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their appointed seasons."