Mikvaot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with cases in which pitch and myrhh stains block the successful immersion of vessels. The general rule is quite obvious—if the person would want to remove the stain of pitch or myrrh, then it blocks immersion. But if we can assume that they don't care, then they do not. 

Mishnah Five
In the case of vessels the following block: pitch and myrrh;
In the case of glass vessels, whether inside or outside; 
On a table or on a board or on a couch;
On those that are [usually] kept clean they block;
On those that are allowed to remain dirty they do not block. 
They block in the case of beds belonging to householders, but they do not block on beds belonging to a poor person. 
They block on the saddle of a house-holder, but they do not block on the saddle of a dealer in water-skins. 
They block in the case of a pack-saddle.   
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: [only if the stain is as big] as an Italian issar.

Explanation
Section one: The entire mishnah deals with when pitch and myrrh (the sap that comes from the myrrh tree), block successful immersion. 
Section two: Glass vessels are the most precious and expensive of all vessels. If pitch or myrrh were to be found anywhere, inside or outside of these vessels, the person would wish to have it removed. Therefore they block immersion.
Section three:  If the table is generally kept clean, then one would want to remove the pitch or myrrh. Therefore, they do block immersion. 
If the table is allowed to remain dirty, then one doesn't care if there is pitch or myrrh on it. Since one doesn't care about it, it doesn't block immersion.
Section four: A normal householder would care if there was pitch or myrrh on his bed. Therefore, if the bed belongs to a householder, pitch and myrrh block immersion. But a poor person is probably used to having a bed with some dirt on it. For him, pitch and myrrh do not block immersion.
Section five: Again, a regular house-holder cares that there shouldn't be pitch or myrrh on his saddle. But those who deal in water-skins are used to the presence of pitch and myrrh. Therefore, they don't block the successful immersion of his saddle.
Section six: On a pack-saddle, they always block immersion. Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says that the stain must have a minimum size—that of a coin called the Italian issar.  


