Ohalot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Sixteen

Introduction
The final mishnah of our chapter deals with an earthenware jar which cannot be defiled from the outside. 

Mishnah Sixteen
A jar resting on its bottom in the open air: 
If an olive-sized [portion] of a corpse is placed beneath it or within it directly [above] its bottom, the uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards, and the jar becomes unclean.   
[If the uncleanness is] outside below a [protruding] side, the uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards, but the jar remains clean.   
[If the uncleanness is] within [the jar] and underneath the protruding sides,   
If there is within the [cavity of] the side a space of a cubic handbreadth everything [within the cavity] becomes unclean, but what lies directly [below] the mouth remains clean. 
If there is not [a space of a cubic handbreadth] the uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards. 
When do these rules apply? When the jar is clean.   
If it was unclean, or if it was one handbreadth high off the ground,   or covered,   or inverted [so as to stand] on its mouth, if there is uncleanness beneath it, within it or above it, everything becomes unclean.

Explanation
Section one: The jar discussed in the beginning of the mishnah is pure, it is open and it is standing on its bottom. The jar is pear-shaped, i.e. it has walls that expand in the middle, as jars often did (and still do). 
Section two: There is a source of impurity within the jar or directly below the jar, opposite the bottom of the jar and not opposite the protruding walls. In all of these cases the impurity goes directly up and down, but not to the sides. The inside of the jar is also impure because earthenware jars receive impurity through their airspace. Thus even if the impurity is not within the jar, since it enters the jar through the jar's mouth, anything in the jar is impure.
Section three: In this case, the impurity is outside the jar, above or below one of the jar's protruding sides.  The impurity goes directly up and down, but it doesn't defile the inside of the jar because earthenware jars are not defiled from the outside and the impurity does not enter the jar rather it goes around the protruding wall.
Section four: Here the impurity is inside the jar, but not directly below the opening. Rather it is inside one of the protruding walls. If the space formed by the protruding wall is a cubic handbreadth, then it is an ohel. Anything in this space is impure and the impurity spreads above and below as well. The jar is also impure.
However, anything that is not directly above or below the sides remains clean.
If the space is less than a cubic handbreadth, then it is not found in an ohel. In such a case the impurity goes up and down but it does not spread to the sides.
Section five: The above rules apply only if the jar is clean.
Section six: There are several situations listed here: 1) the jar is unclean before the piece of corpse is found in its proximity. In this case, it does not prevent impurity from entering and even if the impurity is beneath the protruding wall, it is as if it is beneath the jar itself. 
2) If the jar is one handbreadth above the ground, then the same rules that we saw in mishnah thirteen apply. 
3) If the jar is covered or inverted it becomes an ohel. Even if the impurity is below one of the walls, since the top is covered, there is no difference between the protruding walls and the body of the jar. 
In all of these cases, no matter where the impurity is found, everything, the contents of the jar, below and above the jar, is impure.  
