Ohalot, Chapter Seventeen, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
[With regard to] a field in which a grave had been lost, and upon which a house had been built with an upper story above it: 
If the entrance of the upper room was directly above the entrance of the house, the upper story remains clean;   
But if not the upper story becomes unclean.   
[With regard to] soil from a bet peras, or soil from a foreign country that came in with vegetables, the pieces of the soil combine together [to transmit impurity if they form a portion] the size of a packing-bag seal, the words of Rabbi Eliezer; 
But the sages say: there must be one portion of the size of a packing-bag seal. 
Rabbi Judah says: It happened once that letters came from overseas for the sons of the high priests and they had on them about a se'ah or two se'ahs of seals [of dirt],   but the sages were not concerned on account of uncleanness.  

Explanation
Section one: If the two doors, one of the bottom floor and the one of the top floor, are one on top of the other, the upper story is clean, even though the bottom floor is unclean do to the possibility that it is on top of the grave. If the grave was directly below the house, the ceiling would stop the impurity from entering the upper story. And if the grave was below the outer half of a wall of the house, even the house would be impure (see 6:3). And even if the grave was under the entrance to the house, and we might have thought that the canopy over the entrance to the upper story would form an ohel and bring the impurity into the upper story, the canopy of the bottom floor forms a barrier and doesn't allow the impurity to go above it. It turns out that no matter where the grave actually is, the upper story is pure.
However, if the entrance to the upper story is not directly above the entrance to the bottom floor, the upper story must also be treated as impure because it is possible that the grave is beneath the canopy covering the entrance to the upper story. Since there is nothing above it to block it, the impurity would enter the upper story and defile anything therein.
Section two: Soil from a bet peras and soil that comes from outside the land of Israel both defile when carried (see 2:3). Rabbi Eliezer rules that loose pieces of dirt can combine together to form the minimum amount necessary to defile. This minimum amount is defined as the size of the seal placed on a packing-bag. 
The other sages say that for the soil to defile there must be at least one piece that is as large as the seal on a packing bag.
Section three: Rabbi Judah brings proof that there must be at least one piece of dirt that is the size of the packing-bag seal. He knows of a tradition in which letters came from abroad for "the sons of the high priests" which seems to be some elite group in Jerusalem. Since there was no one piece of dirt that was the size of the packing-bag seal, the sages were not concerned about the purity of the dirt. 
