Ohalot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah deals with blood that is poured out and then lands on the ground and someone or something overshadows it. 

Mishnah Three
 [Blood] which was poured out in the air: 
If the place [where it fell] was an incline and [a person or vessel] overshadowed part of it, he [remains] clean.   
If it was a cavity, or if the blood congealed,  he [becomes] unclean. 
If it was poured out on a threshold: 
If it inclined either inwards or outwards and the house overshadowed it [that which is in the house] is clean.   
If there was a cavity, or if it congealed, [that which is in the house becomes] unclean.
Every part of a corpse is unclean except the teeth, hair and nails;   
But when they are joined [to the corpse], they are all unclean.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case the blood is poured out outside of a house. If it lands on an inclined space, and a person or vessel overshadows part of this blood, he/it is not considered to have overshadowed the entire quarter of a log. While the blood flows down the incline, each part is not considered to be connected to the other part and so he has overshadowed only part of the blood. 
However, if the blood falls into a cavity (a depression in the ground) or if it congeals then because the blood has stopped flowing when one overshadows part of the blood he is considered as having overshadowed all of it and he/it is impure.
Section two: In this case the blood is poured out onto the threshold outside of the house, and the house (or part of it) overshadows part of the blood. If the blood is on an incline and is still flowing (either towards or away from the house), then again the blood is not considered to be connected to its other parts and the people or vessels in the house are pure. In other words, we don't consider the house to be overshadowing the entire quarter of a log of blood. However, if the blood falls into a cavity or it congeals such that it is no longer flowing, the blood is connected to itself and the house conveys the impurity.
Section four: When teeth, hair and nails are separate from a corpse they are not impure as is the flesh and blood. However, when they are joined to the corpse, they are as impure as is everything else. Tomorrow's mishnah will continue to deal with this topic. 

