Ohalot, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah Four

Mishnah Four
A kokhin field may neither be planted nor sown, but its earth is regarded as clean and ovens may be made of it for holy use.   
Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel agree that it [a bet peras in which a grave was plowed over] is examined  for one who wished to perform the pesah sacrifice,but is not examined for one who wants to eat terumah.   
And as for a nazirite:
Bet Shammai say: it is examined,   
But Bet Hillel say: it is not examined.   
How does he examine it? He brings earth that he can move, and places it into a sieve with fine meshes, and crumbles. 
If a bone of barley-corn size is found there [the person passing through the field] is deemed unclean.  

Explanation
Section one: The final type of bet peras is called a "kochin field." There are two main explanations for this, one based on a text which reads "bokhin" instead of "kokhin." "Bokhin" means to cry or wail. According to this reading, this type of field was on the way to the cemetery and people would stop there, put the biers down and wail over the dead. The fear is that a limb of the body might have fallen out onto the field (oops, there goes an arm!). 
The other interpretation (supported by the Tosefta) is based on the word "kokhin". The Tosefta asks: "What is a kokhin field? Any field in which they dig in the ground and moved kokhin to the sides." Kokhin are burial niches. So a kokhin field is one in which the burial niches were moved to the sides of the fields. The fear is that they missed one of the kokhin. 
According to the first explanation, one cannot plant or sow seeds in such a field because the field was designated to be used as a "mourner's field." According to the second explanation, even though the kokhin were removed, it retains the status of a burial ground and therefore it cannot be used for planting or sowing seed.
However, earth taken out of the field is considered pure. The earth in the field is only impure because of a doubt, whether there was a grave there. Therefore the sages decreed that one who entered the field is impure. But they didn't decree that earth taken out of the field should be impure. Therefore, one can take earth out of the bet peras and use it to make a pure oven. 
Section two: Both houses agree that if a person walked through a bet peras which had been plowed over and then wanted to go offer his pesah sacrifice, which can only be done in a state of purity, that they can have the field checked to find out if there really is a bone the size of a barleycorn in it. If such a bone is found, he will be declared impure and he won't be allowed to offer the sacrifice, but if not, he can go on his merry way to Jerusalem. 
They also agree that the field is not checked if all that the person wants to do is eat terumah. The difference between the pesah sacrifice and the terumah seems to be that the sacrificing and eating the pesah on Pesah is a mitzvah and therefore they should do anything possible to allow him to do so. In contrast, eating terumah is not a mitzvah, it's just allowed to the kohanim. If he doesn't eat terumah, he can eat regular produce. 
Section three: However, the two houses disagree with regard to the Nazirite that walks through a bet peras. According to Bet Shammai they do check the field on his behalf and if no bone is found, the Nazirite remains pure. Bet Hillel says that they do not check the field. The Nazirite is considered impure and he must be purified on the third and seventh days. The days in which he is impure will not count towards his term of naziriteship (see Nazir 7:3). 
Section four: To check the earth they would bring any of it that they could carry and they would check it with a sieve. If a bone the size of a barleycorn was found, the man who went through the field was declared impure, lest he had contact with that bone.   


