Ohalot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Mishnah 2:2 stated that a quarter of a log of "mixed blood" defiles in an ohel. Our mishnah discusses what "mixed blood" is. To understand this mishnah we must remember that only the blood of a corpse defiles. Blood that comes out from a person during his lifetime does not defile. 

Mishnah Five
What is ‘mixed blood?   
The blood of a corpse of which an eighth [of a log] came out during his lifetime and an eighth after death, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
Rabbi Ishmael says: a quarter [of a log] during his lifetime and a quarter after death. 
[If] a quarter [of a log] is taken from both of these: Rabbi Elazar bar Judah says: both of these are as water. 
What then is ‘mixed blood’? It is that of a crucified person whose blood is streaming forth and under whom is found a quarter [of a log] of blood—it is unclean.   
However a corpse whose blood drips forth and under whom is found a quarter [of a log] of blood, [the blood] is clean.   
Rabbi Judah says: not so, but that which streams forth is clean and that which drips forth   is unclean.  

Explanation
Section one: Both Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael agree that "mixed blood" is an amount of blood, part of which came from a living person and part of which came from a corpse. Rabbi Akiva rules strictly—even if only half of the requisite quarter log came from a corpse, 1/8 of a log, and then was mixed with another 1/8 of a log of pure blood from a living body, the mixture defiles. 
Rabbi Ishmael says that "mixed blood" is a case where there originally was a quarter of a log of blood from a corpse and the same amount from a living body. Then from this amount, which clearly does defile, one takes a quarter of a log. Since there was originally the requisite amount of impure blood, the quarter of a log removed still defiles. However, if originally there was only 1/8 of a log of impure blood mixed with the same amount of pure blood it would not defile. 
Section two: Rabbi Elazar bar Judah is even more lenient. He responds to Rabbi Ishmael by saying that a quarter of a log of blood that is taken out of a mixture of a quarter log of impure blood and a quarter log of pure blood has the purity status of water. This is an emphatic way of saying it is pure.
Still, Rabbi Elazar must define "mixed blood." He defines it as blood that is streaming forth from a living person. This is the blood that has the "life force" in it, for its loss causes the person to die. However, if the blood drips from him it is clean. Even though its loss eventually causes him to die, the earlier drops don't join together with the later drops (which do cause him to die) to create the requisite quarter of a log.
Rabbi Judah says that the blood that streams forth is pure because the life force does not come out with this blood (this is the Rambam's explanation). But when the last drop of blood comes out of him, his life will definitely have come out and therefore this blood defiles.
[I should note that there are some difficulties in interpreting this mishnah and even in determining who says what, and the relationship of each section to each other.]

