Ohalot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
At the end of yesterday's mishnah we learned that pure vessels protect against impurity together with the walls of an ohel. Today's mishnah illustrates how this rule works.

Mishnah Six
How so? If there was a cistern or a cellar in a house and a large basket was placed over it, [the contents of the cistern or cellar] remain clean. 
But if it was a well [with its upper edge] level [with the ground] or a deficient   beehive upon which the basket was placed, [the contents] become unclean.   
If it was a smooth board or netting without rims, [the contents] remain clean.   
For vessels cannot protect along with walls of an ohel unless they themselves have walls. 
How much must the wall be? A handbreadth. 
If there was half a handbreadth on one side and half a handbreadth on the other, it is not [considered] a wall, as there must be a whole handbreadth on one object.

Explanation
Section one: The basket described here is not susceptible to impurity. If there is a source of corpse impurity in the house, the basket protects the contents of the cistern or cellar from becoming impure.
Section two: As we shall learn in section four, for the basket to stop the impurity it must have walls and join with the walls of the house/ohel. If the well is even with the ground then it has no walls and therefore the basket does not offer a barrier to the impurity. In this case there are no "walls of an ohel" with which the walls of the basket can join. 
The second case is that of a basket placed over a beehive. The beehive may look like an ohel, because it is not stopped up (this is one explanation of the word "deficient"). However, the beehive is not actually treated like an "ohel" but rather like a vessel. Therefore, there are no "walls of an ohel" with which the basket can join in order to prevent the impurity from entering.
Section three: A smooth board or a piece of netting that has no rims/solid sides is not considered to be a vessel. They are not susceptible to impurity. If one of these items is placed on top of a well or a cellar it protects the contents of the well or cellar from being defiled by the impurity in the house. 
Section four: As we learned in section two above, the ohel must have walls for the vessel to protect from impurity.
Section five: The walls must be at least a handbreadth high. It does not count if one side is half a handbreadth and the other side is also half a handbreadth. There must be at least one handbreadth in one place for it to count as the wall of an ohel.   

