Ohalot, Chapter Eighteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The next three mishnayot introduce three different types of bet peras: one in which a grave has been plowed, one in which a grave's location was lost (mishnah three), and a "kochin field" (explained mishnah four). Each of these different types of fields has different rules which govern it. 

Mishnah Two 
There are three [kinds of] bet peras:   
A field in which a grave was plowed may be planted with any kind of plant, 
But must not be sown with any kind of seed, except with seed [yielding produce] which is reaped. 
If [such produce] were plucked, the threshing-floor must be piled up in [the field] itself, and the [grain] sifted through two sieves, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But the sages say: grain [must be sifted] through two sieves, but pulse through three sieves.   
And he must burn the stubble and the stalks.   
[Such a field] conveys uncleanness by contact and carriage but does not convey uncleanness by overshadowing.   

Explanation
Section two: Plants such as trees can be planted in a field in which a grave was plowed because harvesting the fruit of these trees won't uproot the earth. In yesterday's mishnah we learned that Rabbi Yose forbade planting a vineyard, but the other sages seem to allow any type of plant to be planted.
Section three: It is permitted to sow seeds which yield produce that is reaped, meaning cut down.
Section four: However, it is problematic to plant seeds which yield produce that is plucked, meaning torn out of the ground. The fear is that a bone will get stuck to the bottom of the plant and the harvester will bring it into his house and thereby transmit impurity to other places. To remedy this problem he must pile up the produce in the field itself and not bring it to other places. In the field, Rabbi Meir says he must sift through the produce twice to clean off the dirt and any bones. The other sages say he needs to sift pulse (legumes) three times because more dirt is mixed in with it.
Section six: He must burn the stubble and stalks while they are still in the field, again because we are afraid that there is some bone mixed in with them.
Section seven: The field and pieces of dirt from the field convey impurity if one comes into contact with them or if one carries them. But the dirt of the field cannot cause impurity by overshadowing (an ohel) because a bone the size of a lentil does not transmit impurity by overshadowing.

