Ohalot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Mishnah Two
All sloping [parts] of ‘tents’ are reckoned like ‘tents.'
A ‘tent’ [whose sides] sloped downwards and finished off one fingerbreadth [from the ground]: 
If there is uncleanness in the ‘tent’, vessels beneath the slope become unclean. 
If there is uncleanness beneath the slope, vessels in the ‘tent’ become unclean. 
If there is uncleanness within, a person who touches [the tent] from the inside acquires a seven [days’] defilement,   but from the outside, a defilement [lasting till] evening.   
If there had been uncleanness outside, a person who touches the ‘tent’ from the outside acquires a seven [days’] defilement, but from the inside, a defilement [lasting till] evening. 
If there was [a portion of uncleanness] the size of half an olive [touching it] from inside and half an olive from the outside, a person who touches [the ‘tent’] either from within or without acquires a defilement [lasting till] evening.   
If a part [of the ‘tent’ side] trailed along the ground, when there is uncleanness beneath or above [this part], the uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards. 
[In the case of] a ‘tent’ erected in an upper story, with a portion [of its side] trailing over the hatch between the house and the upper story:
Rabbi Yose says it does protect. 
Rabbi Shimon says: it does not protect unless it put up in the usual manner of erecting tents.  

Explanation
Section one: When it comes to determining the laws of when something defiles in a tent, the sloping parts of tents are counted just as the straight and flat parts. 
Section two: The tent here as a sloping part and then finishes off one fingerbreadth away from the ground, such that the sides of the tent are only one fingerbreadth high. There is also a one fingerbreadth section that serves as a flat "roof." If there is a source of impurity under the flat roof part, it spreads to the vessels that are under the slope, even though there is only one cubic fingerbreadth in the space where the impurity is found. The same is true in the opposite situation—if there is impurity in the sloping part it will defile anything that might be in the "roofed" part.
Section three: If there is impurity within a tent, and someone touches the inside of the tent, then the person is defiled for seven days, as he would be if he touched any vessel that was within the tent. However, the impurity conveyed by the outside of the tent is lesser and he will be impure for only one day, until the evening.
Section four: If there is impurity outside of a tent such that it defiles the tent, then one who touches the outside of the tent is impure for seven days. Again, this is similar to one who touches any vessel that has come into contact with the dead. But if he touches it from the inside, he is only impure until the evening.
Section five: There isn't a full-sized piece of impurity touching the tent on any one side, but rather there is half of a piece on each side. These two half-olive portions join to defile the tent, but there is a leniency, and no matter which side a person touches, he is impure only until the evening.
Section six: If the sides of the tent drag on the ground and the impurity is found below this part of the tent, it doesn't spread to the sides, but only goes up and down. In other words, it is not inside the tent. If it is above the tent, it will only go up and down because there is nothing to block it. But it won't go to the sides because it is not inside a tent.
Section seven:   The tent is in the upper story and it slopes down and part of it drags over the hatch between the bottom floor and upper story. Rabbi Yose says that it serves as a barrier to prevent the impurity from entering the upper story. 
Rabbi Shimon says that since the tent is not set up properly, it does not offer protection. The impurity will break through and defile the contents of the upper story. 

