Ohalot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Fifteen

Mishnah Fifteen
Finally a mishnah that discusses something besides this mysterious hive. Today's mishnah discusses a coffins of various shapes. 

Mishnah Five
A coffin which is broad below and narrow above, and has a corpse within it:
A person touching it below remains clean; 
But above becomes unclean.   
If it is broad above and narrow below, a person touching it anywhere becomes unclean. 
If it was the same [above and below], a person touching it anywhere becomes unclean, the words of Rabbi Eliezer.
But Rabbi Joshua says: a handbreadth and more below is clean, but from that handbreadth upwards is unclean. 
If it was made like a clothes-chest, a person touching it anywhere becomes unclean. 
If it was made like a case, a person touching it anywhere remains clean, except at the place where it opens. 

Explanation
Section one: The first coffin described is broad below and narrow above. Above the narrow section is the cover of the coffin. The rabbis held that if one touched any portion that is directly below the opening, he is impure. So if he touches it below, on the sides of the broad portion, he is not touching anything that is directly below the opening. Therefore, he remains pure. But if he touches the walls of the narrow section he is impure for they are directly below the opening.
Section two: In this case the cover above is broader than the remainder of the coffin. Therefore, no matter where he touches the coffin it is below the cover and he is impure. 
Section three: Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua debate the case of a straight coffin. According to Rabbi  Eliezer, since the entire coffin is below the covering, no matter where a person touches it he is impure.
Rabbi Joshua holds that the dead body would be at least one handbreadth above the bottom of the coffin. Therefore, if a person touches from that point of the wall and below, he remains pure. If he touches above the one handbreadth mark, he is impure.
Section four: A clothes chest opens to the top. On a coffin built in such a way, everything is below the opening. Therefore, no matter where he touches, he is impure.
Section five: A "case" has its opening on the side. None of the coffin is below the opening. Therefore, he is impure only if he touches it on the side that opens. 

