
Ohalot, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three 
[In the case where] the cupboard is standing in the doorway and is opened outward, if there is uncleanness inside it, the house remains clean. 
If there is uncleanness in the house, that which is within [the cupboard] becomes unclean, for the manner of uncleanness is to go out and not to go in. 
If its wheeled base protruded three fingerbreadths behind it and there was uncleanness inside it under the roof-beams, the house remains clean.   
When does this ruling apply? When there is a space of one cubic handbreadth,   when it is not easily detachable,   and when the cupboard is of the stipulated size.

Explanation
Section one: The impurity escapes from the cupboard to the outside and therefore the contents of the house remain pure.
Section two: The impurity escapes from the house through the cupboard, thereby defiling all that is in the cupboard.
Section three: The cupboard is sitting in the doorway on a wheeled base. The wheeled base is in the house, but only by three fingerbreadths, less than a handbreadth. The wheeled base has something unclean (piece of corpse) on it and it sits underneath the roof-beams of the house. Since the wheeled base is within three fingerbreadths of the cupboard, it is treated like the cupboard itself and the impurity on the wheeled base does not go into the house, even though it is under the beams of the house.
Section four: The rule in section three is true only if the following three conditions are met:
The wheelbase has the dimensions of an ohel—a square handbreadth. With these dimensions it can prevent the impurity from escaping into the house.
The wheelbase is firmly attached to the cupboard, thereby allowing it to be treated as part of the cupboard.
The cupboard is large enough to hold 40 seahs of liquid/60 seah of dry goods, which is the size the cupboard needs to be for it not to be impure. If the cupboard is smaller, it does not prevent impurity from escaping or entering (we will return to this subject in 8:1). 
