Ohalot, Chapter Seventeen, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah lists cases in which it would very much seem that a person has made a bet peras and yet the mishnah rules that he has not. We will see that there is something "dogmatic" or "traditional" about the formation of a bet peras. Even though there are clearly bones spread around in this field, it is not considered a bet peras because it doesn't fulfill the dictionary/sages' definition of bet peras. To couch this in other terms—the sages said that a bet peras is created under certain circumstances. Even though other circumstances may be very similar, since they are not part of the original tradition, a bet peras is not created. 

Mishnah Three
If a person plows from a pit full of bones, or from a heap of bones, 
Or from a field in which a grave had been lost, 
Or in which a grave was subsequently found, 
Or if he plows a field which was not his own, 
Or if a non-Jew plowed, he does not make a bet peras.
For the rule of bet peras does not apply [even] to Samaritans.  

Explanation
Section one: According to commentators, the sages declared that when a person plows a grave he creates a bet peras, because this is something that is likely to happen. It is likely that a person will want to plow a field next to a grave, and therefore the sages decreed that one who does so creates a bet peras. But it is not common for a person to want to plow over a pit full of bones or a heap of bones and therefore by doing so, he does not create a bet peras.
Section two: In this case there is a double doubt. We don't know if he plowed over the grave, and even if he did plow over the grave, we cannot be sure that his plowing moved bones. Therefore, the mishnah rules leniently.
Section three: The formation of a bet peras is a penalty for one who plows a grave. Since he didn't know that there was a grave in the field, he is not penalized. 
Section four: The penalty for plowing a grave is only meted out to one who plows his own property. 
Section five: The rule of the bet peras applies only to Jews, who are penalized for plowing over a grave. If a grave is plowed by Samaritans it is not a bet peras. All the more so, if a non-Jew plows a field, he does not make it into a bet peras.  


