Meilah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
In today’s mishnah we learn that different types of prohibited substances do not join together to add up to a sufficient amount for a transgression to have occurred. 

Mishnah Four 
Piggul and remnant do not combine with one another because they are of two different names. 
Sheretz and carrion, as well as carrion and the flesh of a corpse do not combine with one another to effect impurity, not even in respect of the more lenient of the two [grades] of defilement.  
Food contaminated through contact with a primary defilement can combine with that contaminated by a secondary defilement to affect uncleanness according to the lower degree of defilement of the two. 

Explanation
Section one: In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that different types of piggul can combine together, and different types of sheratzim can combine together, etc. Today we learn that differently named substances do not combine together. So if one eats half of an olive’s worth of piggul and half of an olive’s worth of notar (remnant) he is not liable, because he has not eaten enough prohibited food of one prohibition.  
Section two: Similarly, sheretz (a creepy crawly thing that transmits impurity—see yesterday’s mishnah) and carrion, and carrion and flesh from a human corpse do not join together to create the minimum amount needed to effect impurity. This is true even with regard to the lower quantity or level of defilement. For instance, less than a lentil’s worth of a sheretz does not join together with less than an olive’s worth of carrion. Similarly, less than an olive’s worth of a human corpse does not join with less than an olive’s worth of animal carrion to transmit the type of impurity that makes on impure for only one day.
Section three: Food that has been contaminated by contact with a source of primary defilement (such as a dead body) now has first degree defilement. Food that has been contaminated with something that has secondary defilement now has second degree defilement. These different foods can combine to form the minimum amount of an egg’s worth to contaminate other foods according to the lower degree of the two. If the joined substance comes into contact with terumah, it would cause it to have third degree defilement, which is a very low level of defilement. We shall learn more about this when we learn tractate Toharot.     
