Meilah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Today’s mishnah teaches that different types of food and different types of drink can join together with regard to various matters. 

Mishnah Five
All kinds of food can combine with one another: 
To make up the quantity of half a peras in order to render the body unfit   
[To make up the food] for two meals to form an eruv;
To make up the volume of an egg to contaminate food; 
To make up the volume of a dry fig with regard to carrying on Shabbat;   
And the volume of a date with regard to Yom Kippur.   
All kinds of drinks can combine with one another:
To make up a quarter [of a log] in order to render the body unfit; 
To make up a mouthful with regard to Yom Kippur.

Explanation
Section one: One who eats half of a peras (the equivalent of two eggs) of unclean food, cannot eat terumah until the evening. The food “renders his body unfit” to eat holy food. Different types of unclean food can join to create this minimum amount.
Section two: One who wants to walk more than two thousand cubits out of his city on Shabbat puts an “eruv,” a meal, at the two thousand cubit mark and then he can walk an additional two thousand cubits. The meal must consist of a certain amount of food (see Eruvin 8:2) and different types of food can join together to create the minimum amount.
Section three: Impure food conveys impurity only if there is the volume of an egg. Different impure foods can join together to create this volume.
Section four: One who carries food from one domain to another on Shabbat is liable only if the food is at least the volume of a dried fig (see Shabbat 7:4). 
Section five: One who eats a date’s worth of food on Yom Kippur is liable. Again, all different foods join together to create this minimum amount.
Section six: One who drinks a quarter of a log of impure drink is rendered unfit to eat terumah until the evening.
Section seven: On Yom Kippur, one who drinks a mouthful is liable. In both of these matters, different foods join together.  

