Meilah, Chapter One, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Today’s mishnah compares the effect that the sprinkling of the blood on the altar has on sacrifices of both higher and lower degrees of holiness. 

Mishnah Four
The act of [sprinkling the] blood of most holy sacrifices may have either a lenient or a stringent effect, but with sacrifices of a lesser degree of holiness it has only a stringent effect. 
How so? 
With most holy sacrifices, before the sprinkling, the law of sacrilege applies both to the innards and to the flesh; after the sprinkling it applies to the innards but not to the flesh;   
In respect of both one is guilty of [transgressing the laws of] notar, iggul and defilement.   
It is thus found that with most holy sacrifices the act of sprinkling has a lenient as well as a stringent effect. 
With sacrifices of a lesser degree of holiness it has only a stringent effect. How so? 
With sacrifices of a lesser degree of holiness, before the sprinkling the law of sacrilege does not apply to the innards or to the flesh; after the sprinkling it applies to the innards but not to the flesh; 
In respect of both one is guilty of transgressing the laws of notar, piggul and defilement. 
It is thus found that with sacrifices of a lesser degree of holiness it has only a stringent effect.

Explanation
Section one: This is an introductory note delineating the structure of the remainder of the mishnah.
Section two: Before the sprinkling of the blood the flesh of most holy sacrifices cannot be eaten by the priests, and its innards cannot be placed on the altar. At this point all parts are subject to the laws of sacrilege. Once the blood is sprinkled, the laws of sacrilege do not apply to the flesh, because it can be eaten by the priests. This is a lenient effect. The innards are still subject to sacrilege, because they can never be eaten. 
After the sprinkling of the blood, the flesh becomes subject to the laws of piggul, notar and defilement, three laws which apply only to edible flesh. This is the stringent effect.
Section three: When it comes to less holy sacrifices, the sprinkling only has a stringent effect. Before the sprinkling, the laws of sacrilege do not apply at all, because they are not yet considered holy. We should note that the laws of meilah (sacrilege) never apply to the flesh of sacrifices of lesser holiness, because they can be eaten by anyone, and not just priests. Sacrilege applies only to food that can be eaten only by priests. Nevertheless, once the blood is sprinkled, the laws of sacrilege do apply to the innards. This is a stringent effect. The sprinkling also serves to make all parts subject to the laws of piggul, notar and defilement, which again is a stringent effect. It turns out that here the sprinkling of blood only has a stringent effect.  

