Meilah, Chapte Two, Mishnah One

Introduction
This entire chapter discusses various states of preparation of every type of sacrifice, and when the sacrifice becomes liable for various prohibitions. As we shall see, the pattern of this mishnah is repeated throughout this highly stylized chapter. There are some halakhot that I will explain here and then refer to throughout the mishnah, so save the commentary for future reference.
The first topic is the bird hatat. 

Mishnah One
The law of sacrilege applies to the hatat of a bird from the moment of its dedication. 
With the pinching of its neck it becomes susceptible to be disqualified through contact with a tevul yom or one who still requires atonement, or by remaining overnight. 
Once its blood has been sprinkled it is subject to [the laws of] piggul, notar and defilement, but the law of sacrilege no longer applies to it. 

Explanation
Section one: As soon as a bird hatat is dedicated, it is subject to the laws of sacrilege, even when it is still alive. Since it is still not edible to the priests, the laws of sacrilege apply (see 1:1).
Section two: Once its neck is pinched, which is how bird sacrifices are slaughtered, it is now subject to disqualification by contact with a “tevul yom.” A “tevul yom” is a person who has immersed in the mikveh but is not fully pure until the sun sets that evening (see Leviticus 22:7). It can also be disqualified by contact with a person who has gone through his purification process but must still bring the requisite sacrifices the next day (see Keritot 2:1). If the blood remains overnight without being sprinkled on the altar, the sacrifice is disqualified. 
Section three: Once the blood has been sprinkled, its flesh is edible and is therefore liable to the laws of piggul, notar and defilement. Piggul is a disqualification that occurs if the priest sacrifices it with the intention of eating it after it can no longer be eaten. Notar is remnat, and defilement refers to the prohibition of eating a sacrifice that has been ritually defiled. 
Since the bird hatat can now be eaten by the priests, it is no longer subject to the laws of sacrilege.  




