Meilah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction
When a nazirite finishes his term he must bring three offerings: a hatat (sin-offering), an olah (whole-burnt offering), and a shelamim (well-being offering). Our mishnah deals with how the law of sacrilege and various other laws apply to these three offerings in a case where a person set aside money to buy the sacrifices but had not yet bought them. 
 
Mishnah Two
If one has set aside money for his nazirite offerings, it may not be used, but the law of sacrilege does not apply to it, as it may all be used for the shelamim.  
If he died and left money [for his nazirite offerings]
If unspecified it shall go to the fund for voluntary offerings; 
If specified:
The money designated for the hatats shall be taken to the Dead Sea; it may not be used, though the law of sacrilege does not apply to it. 
With the money designated for an olah they shall bring a olah; the law of sacrilege applies to it. 
With the money designated for the shelamim they shall bring a shelamim, and it has to be consumed within a day, but requires no bread offering. 

Explanation
Section one: If he set aside money, he is not allowed to use the money, but the laws of sacrilege don’t apply. This is because all of the money might end up going for shelamim (offerings of well-being), and since shelamim are sacrifices of lower sanctity, the laws of sacrilege do not apply to them (see 1:4). 
Section two: If he died and left money, but had not specified how much was to go for each type of sacrifice, then all of the money goes to the general fund in the Temple used to buy voluntary offerings.
Section three: The mishnah now deals with a case where he did specify which coins go for which sacrifices.
The money set aside for a hatat must be destroyed. As we learned in yesterday’s mishnah, a hatat whose owners have died can’t be sacrificed. While it is forbidden to derive any benefit from this money, if he does it is not sacrilege, because the money was not going to be used to buy a sacrifice.
The money for the olah should be used to buy an olah. The law of sacrilege will apply to the olah, as it always does. 
The money set aside for the shelamim is used for a shelamim. It must be eaten by the next day, as is the law for the shelamim of a nazirite (Zevahim 5:6), but it does not need to be accompanied by a bread-offering, because the nazirite is dead and the bread offering is supposed to be put in his hands (see Numbers 6:19). 
   

