Meilah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Nine
 
Mishnah Nine
The law of sacrilege applies to the handful [of a minhah], the frankincense, the incense, the minhah of a priest, the minhah of the anointed high priest and the minhah that is accompanied by a libation, from the moment of their dedication. 
Once they have become sacred by being put in the vessel, they become susceptible for unfitness through contact with a tevul yom or one who still requires atonement, or by remaining overnight, and they are subject to [the laws of] notar and defilement, but [the law of] piggul does not apply to them. 
This is the general rule: whatever has something else which renders it permissible [for the altar or for the use of the priests] is not subject to [the laws of] piggul, nothar and defilement until that act has been performed. 
And whatever does not have something else which renders it permissible becomes subject [to the laws of] notar and defilement as soon as it has become sacred by being put in the vessel, but piggul does not apply to it.

Explanation
Section one: All of these menahot or other items (incense) are completely burned on the altar. No parts thereof are given to the priest. Therefore, the law of sacrilege will always apply to them.
Section two:  Most of this section is the same as that in yesterday’s mishnah except that the laws of piggul do not apply to any of these items.  The mishnah will now explain why the laws of piggul do not apply. 
Section three: Any sacrificial item that has something else that allows it to be burned or eaten is subject to all of these laws, but only after that other thing has been done. For instance, the flesh of an animal is subject to these laws after the blood has been sprinkled on the altar (see mishnayot 1-5). The innards can be put on the altar once the blood has been sprinkled. The minhah can be eaten once the handful has been removed. The two loaves can be eaten once the blood of the lambs has been thrown on the altar, and the showbread can be eaten once the incense has been burned. All of these have other things that permit them.
In contrast, the list in our mishnah “permits itself.” In other words, these things can be sacrificed immediately (none of them are eaten) without waiting for something else to be done. Therefore, they are subject immediately to the laws of notar and defilement. Piggul never applies to such items. For further discussion see Zevahim 4:3.  

