Meilah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Today’s mishnah deals with which parts of a sacrifice combine to make one liable for either sacrilege, or piggul, notar or defilement. If a person eats a little of this part and a little of that part, when does he become liable.

Mishnah Two
Five things in an olah combine with one another: the flesh, the fat, the fine flour, the wine and the oil.
And six in a todah: the flesh, the fat, the fine flour, the wine, the oil and the bread.
Terumah, terumah of the tithe, terumah of the tithe separated from demai, hallah and first-fruits combine with one another to make up the size required to render other things   forbidden and to be liable for the payment of a fifth.

Explanation
Section one: The fine flour, the wine and the oil all accompany the olah, the whole-burnt offering. If one eats less than a perutah’s worth of meat, for instance, and less than a perutah’s worth of oil, but together they are worth a perutah, he has committed sacrilege. If he eats them and together they constitute an olive’s worth, and they were piggul, notar or defiled, he has transgressed the prohibition.  
Section two: There is one more element when it comes to the todah that doesn’t exist for the olah—the loaves that accompany it. These also join with the other parts of the sacrifice. We should note that since the todah (thanksgiving offering) is a sacrifice of lesser holiness, it is not subject to the laws of sacrilege. The six things join together to make one liable for piggul, notar or defilement.
Section three: The items listed here, which I will explain shortly, join together to render other things forbidden, if enough of them fall into non-sacred things. For instance, if a small amount of terumah oil and a small amount of hallah dough are mixed together and together they constitute a seah then fall into less than 100 seahs of hullin (non-sacred) dough, all of the dough is forbidden to non-priests (see Orlah 2:1). They also join together to make one who eats them unwittingly liable to pay back the principle and an added fifth. One is liable for the added fifth only if he eats an olive’s worth of holy things (see Bava Metzia 4:8). 
I shall now briefly explain what each is.
Terumah: taken from produce and given to the priest.
Terumah of tithe: the Levite gives one tenth of his tithe to the priest as terumah. 
Demai is the tithe separated from produce bought from someone who might not have already tithed it. Terumah is then taken from this demai.
Hallah: separated from dough and given to the priest.
Bikkurim: first-fruits, also considered to be holy.     
