Meilah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
Orlah and kilayim of the vineyard can combine with one another.  
Rabbi Shimon says: they do not combine. 
Cloth, sack-cloth, sack-cloth and leather, leather and matting combine with one another.  
Rabbi Shimon: What is the reason?  Because these are all susceptible to the uncleanness caused by sitting.

Explanation
Section one: According to the first opinion, orlah (fruit during its first three years) and kilayim (seeds) that grow in a vineyard combine with one another. The result is that if half of a seah of orlah and half of a seah of kilayim fall into less than two hundred seahs of regular produce, the regular produce is all prohibited. 
Rabbi Shimon holds that since these two prohibitions have different names, they don’t combine together. It seems that the first opinion holds that since they are so similar, they do combine.
Section two: The different materials in this section have different minimum measures for being susceptible to different kinds of uncleanness. Cloth that is three handbreadths square is susceptible to the sitting impurity conveyed by a zav (one with an unusual genital discharge), and for other matters of impurity it is susceptible if it is three fingers square. Sack-cloth must be four by four handbreadths. Leather must be five square handbreadths. And matting must be six square handbreadths. These different materials can join together to create the minimum measure for the most lenient of them. For instance, one handbreadth of cloth will join with three handbreadths of sack-cloth, and one of sack-cloth will join four of leather and one of leather will join five of matting. However, two handbreadths of cloth will not join one handbreadth of sack-cloth, because the cloth is stricter. To put it another way—cloth can count as sack-cloth, but sack-cloth cannot count as cloth.
Section three: In mishnah three we learned that different substances that do not have the same measure do not join together. Seemingly, today’s mishnah deviates from that rule. Rabbi Shimon explains that it does not actually contradict that rule because when it comes to the impurity conveyed by the sitting of a zav, they all potentially have the same measure. If a person cuts off a small piece of any of these materials, the size of one handbreadth square, and he intends to sit on that material, it is susceptible to sitting impurity when a zav sits on it. Since there is one aspect in which they are all the same, they can join together to create the minimum measure be susceptible to impurity. 
 

