Meilah, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Our mishnah discusses when exactly a person who takes something from Temple property is considered to have committed sacrilege. 

Mishnah Four
If he removed a stone or a beam belonging to Temple property, he is not guilty of sacrilege.
But if he gave it to his friend he is guilty of sacrilege, but his fellow is not guilty. 
If he built it into his house he is not guilty of sacrilege until he lives beneath it and benefits the equivalent of a perutah. 
If he took a perutah from Temple property he is not guilty of sacrilege. 
But if he gave it to his friend he is guilty of sacrilege, but his fellow is not guilty. 
If he gave it to the bathhouse keeper, he is guilty of sacrilege even though he has not bathed, for he can say to him, “Behold the bath is ready for you, go in and bathe.”

Explanation
Section one: Simply removing a stone or a beam from Temple property is not considered sacrilege, because he has not yet benefited from it. However, all he has to do is give it to his friend and he has committed sacrilege because his friend will think highly of him for having given him a present. This is considered enough benefit for him to be considered as having committed sacrilege.
His friend who receives the stone or beam cannot be guilty of sacrilege because as we learned in mishnah three, once sacrilege has been committed with an item it becomes hullin and the next person to use it has not committed sacrilege.
Section two: Using the stone or beam to build his house does not constitute sacrilege until he actually lives in the house with the holy stone or beam. 
Section three: The same rule that we stated above with regard to the stone or beam is stated here with regard to a simple coin.
Section four: If he gives it to the bathhouse keeper, he is liable for sacrilege even before he takes a bath. Once he has paid for his bath, he has a right to take his bath whenever he so wishes. This right is considered to be benefit, and therefore he has committed sacrilege. 
