Hallah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with two topics.
The first is separating hallah while naked—perhaps there was a nudist colony? 
The second is how to make dough while ritually impure. This is a problem because ritually impure hallah cannot be eaten—it must be burned.

Mishnah Three
A woman may sit and separate hallah while she is naked, since she can cover herself  but a man may not. 
If one is not able to make one's dough in cleanness he should make it [in separate] kavs,   rather than make it in uncleanness.
But Rabbi Akiva says: let him make it in uncleanness rather than make it [in separate] kavs, just as he calls the clean, so too he calls the unclean; this one he cals hallah with the Name, and the other he also calls hallah with the Name, but [separate] kavs have no portion [devoted] to the Name.

Explanation
Section one: A person’s whose nakedness, meaning genitalia, are showing cannot separate hallah from dough because doing so requires the recitation of a blessing, and it is forbidden to recite a blessing while naked. A woman can separate hallah while sitting naked because she can hide her nakedness with her legs. However a man cannot hide his nakedness while sitting, therefore he cannot separate hallah. I realize that some of you men reading this may be saying to yourselves, “I can cover my nakedness while I sit.” I implore you—don’t try this at home!
Section two: Dough is liable for hallah only if there are 1 ¼ kavs. One who kneads a lesser quantity is not liable to separate hallah. According to the first opinion in this mishnah, if one is unable to separate dough in a state of purity, she should knead it in quantities smaller than 1 ¼ kavs, and this way she can avoid becoming liable for hallah.
Section three: Rabbi Akiva says that it would be better for him to knead the dough in a state of impurity, rather than making it in separate kavs. For when he kneads it in impurity, he will separate hallah and recite a blessing over it using God’s name, even though the hallah is impure. Rabbi Akiva says that the most important thing is that the blessing is recited because this is what sanctifies God’s name. In contrast, when he kneads each kav separately in order to avoid separating hallah, no blessing is recited and God’s name is not sancitified.
I find this debate fascinating. According to Rabbi Akiva, God’s name is sanctified, even over impure hallah. It seems that sanctity and impurity are not polar opposites, at least not in this case. In contrast, the first opinion wishes to avoid a situation where one will be forced to create impure hallah. While one might still have to recite a blessing over this hallah, it seems to be more problematic in the eyes of the author of this section. 

