Hallah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
In rabbinic language “Syria” refers to the land that borders the land of Israel to the north and east but is not considered fully part of Israel.  The rules of tithing and terumah do apply to produce grown by a Jew in Syria but one who purchases produce in Syria can assume that it grew on gentile land and is therefore exempt from the laws of tithing and terumah.  The first subject dealt with in our mishnah is people who are tenant-farming land that belongs to non-Jews in Syria. Tenant-farming means that the tenant has received a piece of land from its owner in order to work the land and keep for himself a portion of the crops. 
The second section deals with whether the laws of hallah apply to dough in Syria in the same way that they do in the land of Israel. 

Mishnah Seven
An Israelite who was a tenant of a non-Jew in Syria:
Rabbi Eliezer makes their produce liable to tithes and to [the law of] the sabbatical year;   
But Rabban Gamaliel makes [it] exempt.   
Rabban Gamaliel says: [one is to give] two hallah-portions in Syria;
But Rabbi Eliezer says: [only] one hallah-portion.   
They adopted the lenient ruling of Rabban Gamaliel and the lenient ruling of Rabbi Eliezer.   
Eventually they went back and acted in accordance with Rabban Gamaliel in both respects.  

Explanation
Section one: According to Rabbi Eliezer, Syria is treated like the land of Israel when it comes to tithes and to sheviit (the sabbatical year). Just as in the land of Israel if a Jew is a tenant-farmer for a non-Jew on land owned by a non-Jew, he still has to separate tithes and observe the laws of the sabbatical year, so too when it comes to land in Syria, he must separate tithes and observe the sabbatical laws.
Rabban Gamaliel disagrees. He holds that since the land belongs to a non-Jew and the Jew who is working the land doesn’t own it, he need not separate tithes or observe the sabbatical laws.
Section two: In tomorrow’s mishnah we will learn that outside of the land of Israel one has to separate two portions of hallah from the dough. Consequently, Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Eliezer debate what to do in Syria. Rabban Gamaliel stated above that Syria was not treated like Israel—therefore, in Syria one has to separate two portions of hallah. Rabbi Eliezer above treated Syria like the land of Israel—therefore in Syria one has to separate only one portion.
Section three: The mishnah now treats us to an interesting tidbit concerning the way people were acting. Originally, they adopted both lenient rulings. In other words, when it came to tithes and the sabbatical year, they treated Syria as if it was not the land of Israel. However, when it came to hallah, they separated only one portion, as if it was the land of Israel. They were not consistent as to which rabbi they followed—they always adopted the more lenient opinion. 
However, eventually they changed their practice and acted consistent with the opinion of Rabban Gamaliel. This seems to be the way of behaving preferred by the mishnah here and in other places as well. One should not select lenient opinions from various rabbis—rather one should choose one rabbi and follow his opinions, at least when these opinions are consistent with one another, as they are here.  


