Hallah, Chapter One, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with other various types of dough and whether it is exempt from hallah.

Mishnah Six
Meisah:
Bet Shammai exempts [from hallah], 
And Bet Hillel makes liable [for hallah].   
Halita:
Bet Shammai makes liable, 
And Bet Hillel exempts.   
The loaves of the thanksgiving sacrifice and the wafers of a nazirite: if one made them for oneself, they are exempt [from hallah]. [If one made them] to sell in the market, they are subject [to hallah].

Explanation
Section one: Meisah is flour into which boiling water has been mixed. It seems that Bet Hillel makes him liable because the water is put into the flour, just as water is normally poured into flour to make it into dough. In contrast, Bet Shammai makes him exempt. 
Section two: Halitah is like meisah, except in this case the flour is poured into the water. Hence, Bet Hillel exempts him. It is not clear why Bet Shammai makes liable.
We should note that according to both talmudim, section one disagrees with section two, and the two come from different sources. If so, there is no halakhic difference between meisah and halita. According to the first opinion, Bet Shammai exempts both from hallah, and Bet Hillel makes them both liable. According to the second opinion, Bet Shammai makes both liable for hallah, and Bet Hillel makes them both exempt. This would imply that Rabbi Judah Hanasi took two different sources that contradict each other and pasted them together in the Mishnah. It is unclear why he would do such a thing.
Section three: The thanksgiving offering is accompanied by three loaves of matzah (Leviticus 7:12).  When the Nazirite completes his naziriteship he brings loaves and wafers (Numbers 6:15). If a person makes these for himself, and from the time he begins to make the dough he intends to use them for these holy purposes, then they are sanctified from the beginning of their existence. One does not have to separate hallah from sanctified food. However, if he makes them to sell them at market, then he must separate hallah from them because they were not sanctified from the outset. They only become sanctified when a person buys them with the intention of using them in the Temple.  

