Hallah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah teaches the minimum measure of hallah that a person must separate from his dough. We should note that this measure is not set by the Torah. According to Torah law, even the tiniest amount would exempt the dough. However, as we saw in the case of terumah, the rabbis set a minimum amount. The fact that this amount is not considered to be from the Torah, also allowed them the ability to make the amount variable depending on the circumstance. 

Mishnah Seven 
The [minimum] measure of hallah is one twenty-fourth [part of the dough].   
If he makes dough for himself, or if he makes it for his son’s [wedding] banquet, it is one twenty-fourth. 
If a baker makes to sell in the market, and so [also] if a woman makes to sell in the market, it is one forty-eighth.   
If dough is made unclean either unwittingly or by an unforeseeable circumstance, it is one forty-eighth.
If it was made unclean intentionally, it is one twenty-fourth, in order that a sinner should not profit.

Explanation
Section one: In general, one must give 1/24 of one’s dough to a kohen as hallah.
Section two: The above is true for a person who makes dough for own personal use, or for use at a family celebration.
Section three: The rabbis were lenient when it came to a baker or a woman making dough to sell in the market. Since these people tend to make larger quantities, even 1/48 will be sufficient enough to give something substantial to the kohen.
Section four: When one has dough that was made impure either unwittingly, or by some unforeseeable circumstance, s/he only has to give 1/48 as hallah. Since this hallah won’t be able to be eaten anyway, only a minimal measurement is required.
Section five: However, if he intentionally makes it unclean in order to get away with giving less hallah, he must give the larger measure. Clearly, we don’t want a person to make his dough unclean so that he can get away with giving less hallah. Remember, the part of the dough that is not hallah can still be eaten, so if he were to get away with giving the lesser amount, a “sinner would profit.” 

