Hallah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that once a woman rolls out wheat dough it becomes liable for terumah. Our mishnah teaches some differences between the rules that apply before she rolls out the dough and those that apply after she rolls out the dough.

Mishnah Two
Dough which became medumma before she had rolled it, it is exempt [from hallah].   
If after she had rolled it, it is subject [to hallah].   
If there occurred to her some doubtful uncleanness before she had rolled it, it may be completed in uncleanness.
If after she had rolled it, it should be completed in cleanness.  

Explanation
Section one: Medumma is a mixture of terumah and hullin (non-sacred produce) when there are not 100 parts of hullin for one part terumah (this topic was dealt with at length in tractate Terumah). If the non-sacred dough becomes mixed with terumah dough before it is rolled out, then she does not need to take out hallah, because it was exempt from hallah before it ever became liable for hallah.
However, if it first becomes liable for hallah when she rolls it, and only afterwards it is mixed with terumah and becomes medumma, then it is still liable for hallah. What will happen in this case is that she will have to give the hallah to the priest and the rest remains medumma, doubtful terumah. Medumma may not be eaten by a non-priest, but it may be sold to a priest. 
Section two: If the dough becomes doubtfully unclean before it becomes liable for hallah, meaning something may (or may not) have happened to it to make it ritually unclean, then she can continue to make the dough in a state of uncleanness. In any case the priest cannot eat the hallah that will be taken out of the dough, for it may be impure, and therefore it doesn’t matter if she makes it certainly impure.
However, if it becomes doubtfully unclean after it has been rolled, then it became liable for hallah before it became impure. It is forbidden to impart certain impurity to hallah (or terumah) that is only doubtfully impure. Since this dough has already been rolled, and thereby made liable for hallah, it is treated as if it is hallah. She must make the rest of the dough in a state of purity. 

