Hallah, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah teaches what species counts as grain and is therefore subject to all of the laws associated with grain. 

Mishnah One 
Five species [of grains] are subject to [the law of] hallah: wheat, barley, spelt, oats and rye.
These are subject to hallah, and [dough made from different types of these grains] are accounted together one with another [as one quantity].
And their “new” [harvest] is prohibited prior to Pesah, and [they are subject] to [the prohibition of] reaping prior to the Omer.  
If they took root prior to the Omer, the omer permits them.
If not, they are prohibited until the next Omer has come.

Explanation 
Section one: There are only five species of grain that count as grain in Jewish law-- wheat, barley, spelt, oats and rye. If bread is made from some other type of grain, it doesn’t count as grain. For instance, before eating other types of grain, one would not say “hamotzi” or “mezonot” but rather “haadamah.” Tomorrow we will learn other consequences of the fact that these five are considered grain and others are not. 
Section two: If one makes dough from a combination of these types of grain, and each type of grain is not of a sufficient quantity to make the dough liable for hallah, the different grains can join together to make the dough liable. In later chapters we will see that the minimum measure of dough to be liable in hallah is 1 ¼ kav. So if there is a mixture of these grains, as long as there is a total of 1 ¼, then hallah must be separated. 
Section three: Until the omer begins to be sacrificed, which is on the second day of Pesah, it is forbidden to eat of the new grain harvest (Leviticus 23:10-14). It is also forbidden to begin to harvest until the omer is first harvested. Only these five grains are subject to these laws—all other grains may be harvested whenever a person wants.
Section four: The mishnah now clarifies what counts as the new harvest in terms of the Omer. If the grain had taken root before Pesah (the omer), then one may harvest it after the omer has begun. But if it had not yet taken root, he would have to wait an entire year, until the next omer, in order to harvest it.  

