Hallah, Chapter Three, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
This mishnah returns us to the subject that was first raised in mishnah seven above—dough from wheat flour that is mixed in with dough from rice flour. As a reminder, wheat flour is subject to the laws of hallah whereas rice flour is not.

Mishnah Ten
One who takes leaven from a dough of wheat [flour] and puts [it] into dough of rice [flour],   [then] if it has the taste of grain, it is subject to hallah, [but] if not, it is exempt.   
If so, why did they say: “Untithed produce of any amount renders food prohibited”?
That is [with regard to a mixture of] a species with its own species, but [with regard to a mixture of a species] not with its own species, only when it imparts taste. 

Explanation
Section one: Leaven is the sour dough used to make new batches of bread rise. If leaven is taken from wheat flour dough and put into rice flour dough, the batch is liable for hallah only if one can still taste the wheat flour. 
Section two: This section raises a difficulty on the law presented in the previous section. According to the quote in this section, “untithed produce of any amount renders food prohibited,” if even a small amount of untithed produce falls into a large amount of tithed produce, then one cannot eat the produce until he removes tithes and terumah. Why then did they say in section one that the mixture becomes prohibited only if it imparts taste?
Section three: The answer is that there is a difference between cases in which one species becomes mixed up in the same species and cases where different species are mixed. So, for instance, if a tiny bit of wheat dough from which hallah had not been removed became mixed up with a large batch of wheat dough from which hallah had been removed, it would be forbidden to eat of it until he removes hallah. There can be no concept of “imparting taste” here because it all has the same taste. In contrast, if there are two different species, then the species that has not had its terumah removed (or that is liable for hallah, as in section one) must impart taste to the species that has had its terumah removed (or is liable for hallah). If there is no taste, then the mixture is not prohibited.  

