Hallah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah is complicated and I will explain it entirely, as opposed to line by line, below.

Mishnah Six 
A man may take the requisite amount for hallah out of [clean] dough from which hallah has not [previously] been removed in order to remove it in a state of cleanness — in order to go on separating [hallah] from it for [unclean] demai, until it becomes putrid, since hallah for demai may be taken from clean [dough] for unclean [dough], and from [one dough for another dough] which is not in close proximity.

Explanation
This mishnah refers to a person who sets aside dough in order for this dough to count as hallah for other dough that he will receive in the future from which he doesn’t want to bother separating hallah. The dough that he will receive in the future is “demai” meaning it was received from an am haaretz, one who doesn’t observe these laws, and therefore we have to be concerned lest hallah has not been removed from it. However, the laws are usually more lenient when it comes to demai. Generally, one cannot take hallah from one batch of dough in order to exempt different dough unless the two batches are in close proximity. When it comes to demai this is permitted. Secondly, one cannot separate hallah from clean dough in order to exempt unclean dough. Again, when it comes to demai this is permitted. The demai dough that he receives from the am haaretz can be assumed to be impure, and nevertheless he can separate pure hallah in order to exempt impure dough. 
	To return to our situation, this person sets aside dough in order for that dough to count as hallah for demai dough that he will receive in the future from an am haaretz. He can do this until the dough becomes putrid. However, he is concerned lest the dough that he sets aside to count as hallah will become impure.  The problem would then be that this dough has not had its hallah removed and by the time he takes the hallah out, it will be impure hallah. To prevent this from happening, he should immediately take the hallah out of this batch of dough. This way at least the hallah for this dough will be pure.  

