Hallah, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah continues to deal with the consequences of the fact that only these five species are considered to be grain.

Mishnah Two
If one has eaten of [these five] on Pesah an olive-size piece of matzah, he has fulfilled his obligation.
[If he ate on Pesah] an olive-size of piece of hametz [made of these grains], he is liable for karet.   
If one of these [grains, having become leavened,] became mixed with any other species, one must remove it on Pesah.   
If one has vowed [to abstain] from [consuming] bread and tevuah (produce), he is prohibited from consuming these [five species] the words of Rabbi Meir. 
The sages say: if one has vowed [to abstain] from [consuming] dagan, is prohibited only from [consuming] these [species] only.   
They are subject to hallah and tithes.  

Explanation
Section one: Matzah must be made of one of these species of grain in order for one to fulfill the obligation of eating matzah on Pesah.
Section two: The opposite also holds true—hametz can only be from these five species. One who eats one of these five species when they are hametz has transgressed Pesah. Other species are completely permitted on Pesah, save for the fact that Ashkenazim customarily do not eat rice.
Section three: If one of these grains, when leavened, becomes mixed with other species, it must be removed from one’s possession before Pesah. 
Section four: In this section Rabbi Meir and the sages debate the meaning of the word “tevuah” which I usually translate as produce. All agree that if one vows to abstain from bread, he means these five species. The question is: what if he vows to abstain from tevuah? According to Rabbi Meir, tevuah refers to these five species. Thus in such a case he may not have these five species, but he may have beans. The sages say that “dagan” is the word used to refer to these five species. If one vows not to have “dagan” then he can’t have these species, but if he vows not to have tevuah, he can’t have beans or other types of produce either. Tevuah is a more inclusive term.
Section five: As stated above, these five species are liable for hallah. They are also liable for tithes. This note is included at the end of today’s mishnah because tomorrow we will learn what things are exempt from tithes. 

