Hallah, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with someone who separates his hallah before the flour has been mixed with water to become dough. The Torah says that you are supposed to give the first of “your dough” to the kohen, not the flour before it becomes dough. Our mishnah rules that the flour that he calls “hallah” does not actually become hallah. 

Mishnah Five
If one separates his hallah [while it is still] flour, it is not hallah, and in the hand of a priest it is considered stolen property.
The dough is still subject to hallah;
And the flour, if there is the minimum quantity, it [also is] subject to hallah.
And it is prohibited to non-priests, the words of Rabbi Joshua. 
They said to him: It happened that a non-priest sage seized it [for himself].   
He said to them: He did something damaging to himself, but he benefited others.

Explanation
Section one: As stated above, if he separates his hallah before he mixes it with water to become dough, that which he calls hallah does not have the status of hallah. Therefore, if he gives it to a kohen, the kohen must return it to him. If the kohen does not return it, it is as it is a stolen thing in the kohen’s possession.
Section two: The dough made from the remaining flour is still subject to hallah, because the hallah that he did take out does not count.
Section three: The flour that he took out and called hallah, if there is a minimum amount (1 ¼ kavs) then hallah must be taken from this dough as well.
Section four: Despite the fact that this flour does not have the status of hallah, Rabbi Joshua says that it is prohibited to non-priests. According to Rabbi Joshua, since he called it hallah, it can only be eaten by priests, even though it is not actually hallah.
Section five: The other sages respond that it happened that a non-priest who was a sage grabbed a loaf made from this flour in order to eat it. This proves, to the sages, that this flour is permitted to non-priests.
Section six:  Rabbi Joshua responds that what the sage did was indeed forbidden. But in a roundabout way, he helped others. Other non-priests will now eat this bread thinking that it is permitted to them as well. Since they don’t know that it is actually prohibited, they are not considered to be sinning. So it turns out that this sage knowingly erred, in order to aid others. While this is a strange concept, we should remember that the only reason that Rabbi Joshua considers this bread prohibited to non-priests is that he called it hallah—it is not actually hallah. The transgression of a non-priest eating it is certainly not from the Torah.     


