Hallah, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that although some things are exempt from tithes, they may still be liable for hallah. 

Mishnah Three
The following are subject to hallah, but exempt from tithes: gleanings, from the forgotten sheaf, from peah or from ownerless produce and the first tithe from which terumah has been removed, second tithe and consecrated [produce] which has been redeemed, and that which remains over from the omer, and grain which has not grown one-third [ripe].   
Rabbi Eliezer says: grain which has not grown one-third [ripe] is exempt [also] from hallah.  

Explanation
Gleanings, the forgotten sheaf, peah and ownerless produce are all exempt from tithes because they are all, in a sense, already given to someone else. If the Levite is poor he can just come and take them for himself. Anyone can take the ownerless produce. Therefore, one need not give tithes from these things. However, all of them are liable for hallah.
First tithe from which terumah has been removed is not liable for tithes (it already is tithe!) but the Levite must separate hallah and give it to the priest.
Second tithe and consecrated produce are likewise, obviously not subject to tithes, but if they are grain, one must separate hallah before eating them.
When they would harvest the omer, beginning on the second night of Pesah, they would harvest three seahs worth of barley. However, they would only use the choicest tenth of a seah. The rest they would redeem in order to make it hullin and then it could be eaten by anyone. This flour is exempt from tithes, because at the time its processing was done (when it was harvested and made it into a pile) it was holy and exempt from tithes. However, liability for hallah is determined by when it was made into dough, and by the time the omer flour was made into dough, it was already hullin, non-sacred.
In Maasrot 1:3 we learned that grain that had not yet become one third ripe is exempt from tithes. However, according to the sages, it is still liable for hallah. This is because dough made from this unripe grain is still called bread (I can’t imagine it would have tasted very good, but who knows?).
Rabbi Eliezer disagrees and says that such dough is also exempt from hallah. Numbers 15:20 calls hallah “terumah.” Since terumah is not separated from produce that is not one third ripe, so too hallah. 
