Hallah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that one can give hallah from outside of Israel to any priest, even an am haaretz who might defile it, because there is no prohibition of defiling this hallah. Our mishnah continues to list other priestly gifts that can be given to any priest, without fear that he will defile it. With regard to some of these things, there is no prohibition against defilement, and with regard to some of them, we assume that the priest will be cautious and not defile them.

Mishnah Nine
These may be given to any priest:   
Devoted things (haramim);
Firstlings;
The redemption of the first born;
The [lamb substituted as] ransom for the firstling of a donkey;
The shoulder, the two cheeks and the maw;
The first of the fleece;
Oil [fit only] for burning;
Consecrated food [which must be eaten] within the Temple;
And bikkurim.   
Rabbi Judah prohibits bikkurim.   
Vetches of terumah:
Rabbi Akiva permits,   
But the sages prohibit.

Explanation
Section one: Haramim are referred to in Numbers 18:14, which states, “all herem (devoted thing) in Israel shall be yours (to Aaron and his descendents).” These refer to gifts given to priests—there is no prohibition of making them impure.
Section two: “Firstlings” are the first born of pure domesticated animals, sheep, cows and goats. If they are unblemished they are sacrificed and parts are eaten by priests. If they are blemished, then the priest gets to keep the entire animal.
Section three: This is the five shekels used to redeem a first-born human child (see Numbers 18:17-18).
Section four: The first born of a donkey is redeemed with a lamb (see Exodus 13:13). The priest gets the lamb.
Section five: The parts of non-sacrificial animals given to the priest (see Deuteronomy 18:3-4). 
Section six: The priest gets the first shearings of the sheep (Deuteronomy 18:4).
Section seven: Impure terumah must be burned. Since it is already impure, one can give it to an am haaretz priest.
Section eight: If the priest has to eat the offering within the Temple then we can assume that he will eat it in purity. Am haaretz priests were not suspected of going into the Temple while impure.
Section nine: First fruits must be eaten while pure (both the fruit and the person). The rabbis hold that since these first fruits will be brought to the Temple, the am haaretz priest will be careful with their purity and therefore they can be given to any priest. Rabbi Judah disagrees.
Section ten: Vetches are normally animal food (see Maaser Sheni 2:4) but are occasionally eaten by humans. Rabbi Akiva holds that since they are not really food for humans, the laws of purity don’t apply and therefore they can be given to an am haaretz priest. The other rabbis hold that the purity laws do apply, and they should only be given to a priest known to preserve the purity laws.  

