Eduyoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three (part one)

Introduction
This mishnah is one of the longer mishnayoth in the entire Mishnah, and it contains a long argument amongst the Sages about the quantities of flesh separated from corpses or from limbs separated from living bodies that will cause impurity.  This mishnah is also a continuation of the previous mishnah, and the same Sages that were present there are present in our mishnah.
Due to the length of the mishnah, and its intricate detail, we will divide it into two parts, one for today and one for tomorrow.

Mishnah Three
An olive’s quantity of flesh severed from a limb of a living man: 
Rabbi Eliezer pronounces impure and Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Nehunia pronounce pure. 
A barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from a limb of a living man, 
Rabbi Nehunia pronounces impure and Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua pronounce pure. 
They said to Rabbi Eliezer: what reason have you found for pronouncing impure an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from a limb of a living man? 
He said to them: we find that a limb from a living man is like an entire corpse; just as in the case of a corpse, an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from it is impure, so also in the case of a limb from a living man an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from it must be impure. 
They said to him:  No!  When you pronounce impure an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from a corpse, it is because you have pronounced impure a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from it. But how can you also pronounce impure an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from a limb of a living man, seeing that you have pronounced pure a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from it? 
They said to Rabbi Nehunia: what reason have you found for pronouncing impure a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from a limb of a living man? 
He said to them: we find that a limb from a living man is like an entire corpse; just as in the case of a corpse, a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from it is impure, so also in the case of a limb from a living man, a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from it must be impure. 
They said to him:  No!  When you pronounce impure a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from a corpse, it is because you have pronounced impure an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from it. But how can you also pronounce impure a barley-grain’s quantity of bone severed from a limb of a living man, seeing that you have pronounced pure an olive’s quantity of flesh severed from it? 

Explanation
Section one:  In the first section of this mishnah the opinions of the different Sages are listed without explanations.  With regards to an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a living limb, Rabbi Eliezer declares it impure and Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Nehunia declare it pure.  With regards to a barley-grain’s (smaller than an olive) quantity of bone separated from living flesh, Rabbi Nehunia declares it impure and Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Eliezer declare it pure.  In other words, Rabbi Joshua consistently says that all of these things are pure, whereas Rabbi Nehunia and Rabbi Eliezer are somewhat inconsisent, each one declaring one thing pure and the other impure.
Section two:  In this section the Sages ask Rabbi Eliezer why he declared that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a living limb is impure.  He answered them that a limb separated  from a living person is impure like a corpse.  Therefore, just as an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a corpse is impure, so too an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a limb is impure.  
The Sages respond by refuting his analogy.  The reason that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a corpse is impure is that he has already stated that a barley-grain’s quantity of bone is impure.  However, a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a living limb is pure (according to Rabbi Eliezer), and therefore he cannot state so easily that an olive’s quantity of flesh is impure.  In other words a corpse is more impure than a limb separated from a living body (with regards to the purity of separated pieces of bones), and he therefore should not be able to compare one to the other.  
Section three:  In this section the other Sages ask Rabbi Nehunia why he declared that a barley-grain’s size of bone separated from a living limb is impure.  He answered them that a limb separated from a living person is impure like an entire corpse.  Therefore, just as a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a corpse person is impure, so too a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a limb is impure.  
The Sages respond by refuting his analogy.  The reason that a barley-grain’s quantity of bone separated from a corpse is impure is that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a corpse is impure.  However, Rabbi Nehunia already stated that an olive’s quantity of flesh separated from a limb is pure; how therefore can he learn that a barley-grain’s size of bone separated from a limb is impure.  In other word’s, Rabbi Nehunia’s analogy was based on the similarity in the impurity of limbs separated from living bodies with corpses.  However, he taught above that flesh separated from corpses was more impure than flesh separated from limbs from a living body, and therefore he cannot learn one from the other with regards to the issue of bone impurity.  

