Eduyoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who is called “issa” or “dough”, meaning that his lineage is “mixed up” like dough.  This is a man from a potentially priestly family that may have been “contaminated” by intermarrying with unfit priests, or “halalim”.  A “halal” is the child of a mother who should not have been married to a priest, such as a divorcee.  A woman who should not have been married to a priest but nevertheless does so becomes a “halalah”.  The fact that “halalim” may have married into this family casts in doubt the status of all subsequent generations.   
We should note again that lineage was an extremely important issue in Talmudic society, as it was in most of the ancient world.  Lineage was especially important to the priestly elite, who could lose their status by not preserving the “purity” of their line.  

Mishnah Three
Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Judah ben Bathyra testified concerning the widow of [a man belonging to] a family of doubtful lineage (an issa), that she was fit to marry into the priesthood, 
[And that those of] a family of doubtful lineage are fit to declare who was unclean   and who clean, who was to be put away and who was to be brought near.   
Rabban Gamaliel said: we accept your testimony, but what can we do since Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai ordained that courts should not be commissioned for this purpose?  The priests would listen to you concerning those who might be put away, but not concerning those who might be brought near!

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Judah ben Bathyra testify that a widow of an “issa” is fit to marry into the priesthood.  Since an “issa” is only a case of doubtful lineage, and we are not sure that there really were “halalim” in the family, the ruling is not stringent.  Note that if we were sure that this widow had been married to a “halal” she would subsequently be forbidden to marry a priest.  Furthermore, if this was a divorcee, there would be no issue since no divorcee can marry a priest.  The only issue arises with the widow of an issa.    
Section two:  In their second testimony Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Judah ben Bathyra testify that the people of such a family are able to declare the status of the women among them: which women are “unclean” and therefore unable to marry priests, and which are “clean” and therefore able to marry priests.  In other words, although this family itself has had a shadow cast upon its lineage, the members of the family are relied on to testify with regards to the status of the women within their family.  
Rabban Gamaliel responds that although this testimony is legally and logically acceptable, and he agrees that the family itself is fit to sort out its own lineage, Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai, the famous Sage who survived the destruction of the Second Temple, already decreed that the courts should not allow the widow of an “issa” to marry a priest.  Although Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai agreed that this was permitted by law, the priests are stringent in this matter, and would not allow the court to permit them to marry such a woman.  As we saw in the previous mishnah, many Jews were much more stringent in manners of lineage than the law required.  Here Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai teaches an important principle:  if the people are going to be so strict, the court should not make rulings that they in any case will ignore.  This would cheapen the authority of the court by putting it into blatant conflict with the people.  
