Eduyoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
Our mishnah contains two testimonies, and an additional law stated by Rabbi Akiva.  

Mishnah One
Rabbi Joshua ben. Bathyra testified concerning the blood of carcasses that it was pure.
Rabbi Shimon ben Bathyra testified concerning the ashes of purification, that if a defiled person had touched part of them he had defiled the whole of them.  
Rabbi Akiva added in regard to the fine flour, the incense, the frankincense, and the coals, that if a tevul yom had touched part of them he had made the whole of them unfit.

Explanation
Section one:  This law was learned above, chapter five, mishnah one. There we learned that everyone holds that the flesh of a carcass (an animal which was not properly slaughtered) is impure.  Beth Shammai held that the blood of a carcass is not like the flesh, and it is not impure, whereas Beth Hillel held that it is impure.  In our mishnah Rabbi Judah ben Bathyra testifies that the law is like Beth Hillel.  
Section two:  The “ashes of purification” are the ashes of the red heifer which are combined with water and then used to purify one who has contracted corpse impurity.  According to Rabbi Shimon ben Bathyra if an impure person touches some of these ashes, all of the ashes that are in the same pile have become impure.  Even though each ash is its own distinct object and they are not attached to each other, one who touches some, defiles it all.
Rabbi Akiva adds several other items that are in truth each individual, separate things, yet if part of them are touched by an impure person the entire pile is impure.  This includes flour, incense, frankincense and coals, all of which are used on the altar in the Temple.  If these are touched even by a “tevul yom”, someone who as already immersed himself in a mikveh to become clean but the sun has not yet set, will make them impure.  Note that the reason that Rabbi Akiva mentions specifically the “tevul yom” is that the Saducees and other Jewish sects (including the Dead Sea sect) held that a “tevul yom” was pure.  A person did not have to wait for sundown to become pure after having entered the mikveh.  In fact, we know from the Dead Sea Scrolls, that this was one of the major disputes between the Dead Sea sect and those with whom they were arguing, probably the Pharisees.     


