Eduyoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah contains Rabbi Yishmael’s list of three instances in which Beth Shammai ruled more leniently than Beth Hillel.

Mishnah Three
Rabbi Yishmael says:  there are three instances of lenient rulings by Beth Shammai and strict rulings by Beth Hillel. 
The book of Ecclesiastes does not defile the hands, according to the opinion of Beth Shammai; 
But Beth Hillel say: it defiles the hands. 
Water of purification which has done its duty:   	
Beth Shammai pronounces it pure,   
But Beth Hillel pronounces it impure.   
Black cumin:   
Beth Shammai pronounces it not liable to become impure,   
But Beth Hillel pronounces it liable to become impure. 
So, too, with regard to tithes.

Explanation
Section one:  According to the Rabbis the Holy Scriptures, meaning any canonized book in the Bible, cause ones hands to be ritually defiled.  According to the Talmud the reason is that people used to put the scrolls into arks with terumah food, reasoning that both were holy.  Mice would come to eat the food and they would destroy the scrolls.  By decreeing that the scrolls would defile the terumah, people stopped this practice.  
	There are several debates in the Mishnah about what books are included in the Biblical canon such that they defile the hands.  According to Beth Shammai, Ecclesiastes (Koheleth) does not defile the hands.  This is probably due to the deeply pessimistic, bordering on heretical, tone of the book.  At times the author of the book has at least serious doubts about whether or not the performance of good deeds brings with it rewards, a doctrine held as true by the Rabbis.  Beth Hillel includes it in the Biblical canon probably for two reasons:  1)  it was, according to tradition, written by King Solomon; 2)  the last verse of the book exhorts the reader to listen to God’s word and to do good, a message that was certainly acceptable to the Rabbis.
Section two:  “Waters of purification” refers to the water that has been mixed with the ashes of a red heifer, and was used to rid a person of corpse impurity.  According to Beth Shammai, the water remains pure even after it has been sprinkled on the impure person.  Although before it has been used it causes impurity to one who touches it unnecessarily (see Numbers 19:21), according to Beth Shammai once it has been used it is no longer impure.  Beth Hillel holds that these waters remain impure even after they have been used.
Section three:  In this section Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel debate about the status of black cumin.  If black cumin is considered a food, then it should be receptive to impurity and one who wishes to eat it would have to first separate the necessary tithes and terumah.  Beth Shammai does not consider black cumin to be “food” and therefore holds that it is not receptive to impurity nor subject to the laws of tithes and terumah.  Beth Hillel holds that it is food and is therefore receptive to impurity and one who eats it must separate tithes and terumah. 
