Eruvin, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
In the previous mishnayot we discussed a resident of a courtyard or alley who intentionally did  not participate in the eruv with the other residents.   In our mishnah the rabbis discuss a person who forgot to join in the eruv with the others.

Mishnah Three
If one of the residents of a courtyard forgot to join in the eruv, his house is forbidden both to him and to them for the taking in or for the taking out of any object.   
But their houses are permitted both to him and to them.   
If they gave their part [of the courtyard] to him, he is permitted but they are forbidden.   
If there were two [who forgot to join in the eruv], they restrict each other, because one may give his part and also acquire the part [of others] but two may give their parts but may not acquire the parts [of others].

Explanation  
Section one:  The Talmud explains that this resident nullified his partial ownership in the courtyard and alley.  Hence, the other people can carry in those areas.  However, neither he nor they can carry in and out of his house.  They cannot carry in and out of his house because although he nullified his partial ownership in the courtyard and alley, he did not nullify ownership over his own house.  He too cannot carry in and out of his house because the courtyard is owned exclusively by them and his house is owned exclusively by him.
Section two:  They obviously can carry from the courtyard to their own homes, because they all participated in the eruv.  However, even he can carry from the courtyard to their homes because he is a guest in both their courtyard and their home.  A guest in someone else’s home follows the same rules as does the homeowner himself—if the homeowner carries from the courtyard into the home, so too does the guest.
Section three: If the other residents who did set up the eruv give him their share of the courtyard, he may carry from his own home into the courtyard, because he owns both the courtyard and his home.  However, they may not carry from their homes into the courtyard because they are owned by different people. They are not considered to be his guests in his courtyard because many people cannot be considered the guests of one individual.
Section four:   In this case there were two people who forgot to participate in the eruv.  There is no way for them to carry in the courtyard. Even if the other residents were to give them their share in the courtyard, they can’t carry there.  In such a case both would own the courtyard but neither set up an eruv, so neither can carry.  The Talmud explains that even if one of these now gives his partial ownership of the courtyard to the other, the other still can’t carry there.  When the others nullified their ownership, this nullification didn’t work to allow both of the others to carry there.  We therefore say that the courtyard is still owned by the others and therefore the individual cannot nullify his ownership over a courtyard which he doesn’t fully own.  
The mishnah summarizes these rules:  one person can annul his ownership and take ownership from others (sections one-three).  Two people can nullify their ownership over the courtyard, but not take ownership from the others (section four).     
