Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with several people who are traveling on the road, fall asleep and wake up after Shabbat has begun, the situation described in yesterday’s mishnah.  

Mishnah Six
Two men, some of whose cubits enter into the cubits of the other, may bring their meals and eat them in the middle, provided that this one does not carry out anything from his limit into that of the other. 
If there were three men and the prescribed limit of the middle one overlapped with the limits of the others, he is permitted to eat with either of them and either of them is permitted to eat with him, but the two outer persons are forbidden to eat with one another. 
Rabbi Shimon said:  To what is this similar? To three courtyards that open one into the other and also into a public domain: If they made an eruv for the outer ones with the middle one, the middle one is permitted with them and they are permitted with it, but the two outer ones are forbidden access to one another.

Explanation
Section one:  Two men wake up and find that they both fell asleep and Shabbat began.  As we learned yesterday, they cannot walk 2000 cubits because they did not have intention to spend Shabbat there.  Basically what the mishnah teaches is that one’s four cubit circle is not extended by the other’s.  If they have cubits which are shared by the two of them, they can bring their meals and eat them in the middle, but neither may go past his four cubit limit nor bring anything past his four cubit limit.
Section two:   The same is true of three people who find themselves in the same situation.   They may each go their four cubits.  If one of them shares cubits with the other two, but the other two don’t share with each other, the middle one may go into their area and they may each go into his, but the two outer ones may not go into each other’s cubits.  Perhaps, were it not for this mishnah, we might have thought that the person in the middle, who can walk in all three persons’ areas, allows the two outer persons to also go into all three others area.  The mishnah says that this assumption would be incorrect.
Section three:  Rabbi Shimon draws an analogy between the above situation and the situation of three courtyards all open to one another and also open to the public domain. The fact that they are open to the public domain means that a person may not carry from one to the other without an eruv.  If they made an eruv for the two outer one’s to carry into the middle one, then it is permitted to carry from the middle courtyard to the two outer ones and vice versa.  However, it is still forbidden to carry from one of the outer courtyards into the other outer courtyard.  
