Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
In the time of the Mishnah, every Hebrew month had either 28 or 29 days, but people would not know before the end of the month how many days any given month had.  This was decided by the testimony of witnesses who would come to the court in Jerusalem and testify that they had seen a new moon (we will learn about this in tractate Rosh Hashanah).  Therefore, before the calendar was fully fixed, on the 28th day of a month, a person would not know if the next day will be Rosh Hodesh (the first of the month) or the last day of the preceding month.  This was an especially significant problem on the last day of Elul, the month that precedes Rosh Hashanah.  Until witnesses came one would not know if the next day was Rosh Hashanah or not.  Our mishnah deals with the problem of setting up an eruv in such a situation.

Mishnah Seven
Rabbi Judah says: [if on the eve of the] New Year a man was afraid that [the preceding month of Elul] might be intercalated, he may prepare two eruvs and make this declaration:  
“My eruv for the first day is that to the east and the one for the second day is that to the west”; 
“the one for the first day is that to the west and the one for the second day is that to the east”; 
“my eruv is for the first day, and for the second I shall be as the people of my town”;
“my eruv is for the second day, and for the first I shall be as the people of my town.” 
But the sages did not agree with him.

Explanation
Section one:  The person described in this mishnah finds himself on the 28th of Elul, assuming that the next day is going to be Rosh Hashanah, but not knowing if the day after will also be Rosh Hashanah.  If witnesses come the next day by a certain time, then it and it alone will be Rosh Hashanah, but if they do not come, then the following day will also be Rosh Hashanah. The problem therefore is how to set up an eruv for both days?  Rabbi Judah says that he can treat these two days as if they were two separate entities of holiness, just as Rabbi Eliezer in yesterday’s mishnah said concerning the festival which precedes or comes after Shabbat.  
Section two:  Just as the rabbis disagreed with Rabbi Eliezer in yesterday’s mishnah, so too they disagree with Rabbi Judah in this mishnah.  They reason that the two days may be one entity of holiness, in which case one cannot set two separate eruvin for the two days.  
We should note that at a certain point during the mishnaic period it became fixed that Rosh Hashanah was two days, and to this day Jews all over the world, and even those in the land of Israel observe two days of Rosh Hashanah.   The two days are considered to be one long day of kedushah (holiness) and therefore, one cannot set up two different eruvin for the two days. In contrast, the second day of festivals (second day of Yom Tov) is only observed in the Diaspora.  Where this second day is observed, one may set up two different eruvin for the two days.  

