Eruvin, Chapter Six, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
To remind ourselves, in order to carry in a courtyard they would set up an eruv, and in order to carry in the alley, which would lead from courtyard to other courtyards they set up a “shittuf”, an alley partnership.  Just as the eruv is a common meal placed in one of the homes, so too is the shittuf.  The basic difference is functional—one works for a courtyard and the other for an alley.  Our mishnah deals with cases where one (either an eruv or shittuf) was set up but not the other. 

Mishnah Eight
Five courtyards which were each opened into the other and into an alley, and they made an eruv for the courtyards but they did not share in a shittuf for the alley, they are permitted [the use of the] courtyards but forbidden that of the alley.  
If they shared in a shittuf for the alley [but not in the eruv for the courtyards], they are permitted the use of both.  
If they made an eruv for the courtyards and they made a shittuf for the alley, and one of the tenants of a courtyard forgot to contribute to the eruv, they are permitted the use of both.  
If one of the residents of the alley forgot to share in the shittuf, they are permitted the use of the courtyards but forbidden that of the alley,
Since an alley to its courtyards is as a courtyard to its houses.

Explanation
Section one:  The eruv which they made for the courtyards is sufficient to allow them to carry in the courtyards, but not sufficient in and of itself to allow them to carry in the alley. For that they would have needed a shittuf.
Section two:  In this case, they shared in the shittuf for the alley, and this is sufficient, at least ex post facto, to allow them to carry in the courtyards as well.  The shittuf is to the courtyards what the courtyards are to the individual homes, as we will see at the end of the mishnah.  In other words, the alley includes the courtyards and since they can carry in the alley, they can carry in the courtyards as well.
Section three: This case is similar, in essence, to the previous case.  The fact that one person didn’t participate in the eruv renders the eruv invalid.  Nevertheless, the fact that they all participated in the shittuf renders it valid and as we learned above, sufficient to allow carrying in the courtyard as well.  This section emphasizes that even if they intended to allow carrying in the courtyard by setting up the eruv but did not succeed in doing so, the shittuf is still sufficient to allow carrying in the courtyard.
Section four:  This section is to section one what section three was to two (note the chiastic structure).  Since the shittuf was not valid, they cannot carry in the alley.  However, this doesn’t affect the eruv which they did set up and which allows carrying in the courtyards.   
The final clause explains the relationship between the three areas, the alley, the courtyard and the homes.  Simply put, an eruv/shittuf for the larger more encompassing area is effective for the more limited area, but the opposite is not true.   

