Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with a resident of a courtyard who does not spend Shabbat in his own home.  The question is, if he doesn’t participate in the eruv, does he render it ineffective for the other residents?

Mishnah Five
One who leaves his house and goes to spend Shabbat in another town, whether he was a Gentile or an Israelite, he prohibits [the other residents from using the eruv], the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Judah says: he does not prohibit.   
Rabbi Yose says: a Gentile prohibits but an Israelite does not prohibit because it is not usual for an Israelite to return on Shabbat. 
Rabbi Shimon says: even if he left his house and went to spend Shabbat with his daughter in the same town he does not prohibit, since he turned his attention away.

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Meir, although the person is not present, the very fact that he owns a home in the courtyard and that home does not participate in the eruv, means that the entire eruv is ineffective.  
Section two:  Rabbi Judah diametrically opposes Rabbi Meir.  He holds that when a person is not present in his home, his lack of participation does not prohibit others from using the eruv.  When he is not there he is not considered one of the owner’s of the courtyard and therefore he need not participate.
Section three:  Rabbi Yose agrees with Rabbi Judah that if he doesn’t dwell in the courtyard he doesn’t count as one of the courtyard’s residents, at least as long as he’s not there.  However, since a Gentile may return on Shabbat, he does render the eruv ineffective.  In contrast, a Jew will not be likely to return on Shabbat and hence does not render the eruv ineffective.  
Section four:  Rabbi Yose implied that if the Jew was likely to return on Shabbat, his lack of participation might indeed render the eruv ineffective.  Rabbi Shimon goes a step further.  Even if the Jew is spending Shabbat in a nearby courtyard within the same town, and therefore might return, the fact that he is not actually there means that he doesn’t render the eruv ineffective.  Since he turned his attention away from his own courtyard and decided to spend Shabbat elsewhere, we don’t treat his courtyard as if he is actually there.     
