Eruvin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with measuring the Shabbat limit.

Mishnah Five
They measure [the Shabbat limit] only through an expert.   
If he extended the limit at one point and limited it at another, they observe the place where he extended it.   
If there was one who made it a greater distance and one who made it a lesser distance, the greater distance is observed. 
Even a slave and even a female slave are believed when they say, “Thus far is the Shabbat limit”, since the sages did not enact the law in order to be strict but in order to be lenient.

Explanation
Section one:  The Shabbat limit should be measured only by an expert at taking such measurements.  As we saw in yesterday’s mishnah, taking such measurements was not easy, so it is understandable why the rabbis required this to be done by an expert.
Section two:  There are several different explanations for this section.  The Rambam, basing himself on the Talmud, explains that this refers to an expert who measured the limit and it was longer than the people of the city thought at one point, but shorter at another point.   The mishnah teaches that just as the people of the city must listen to the expert’s measurement for where he limited the size, so too they may listen to him with regard to the place where he expanded it.
Others explain that on one side he came up with two different measurements.  For instance, his measurement to the northeast was longer than that to the southeast.  In such a situation we assume that the shorter measurement was mistaken and we listen to the longer one.
Section three: If two experts come up with different measurements, the bigger measurement is observed.  
Section four:  Anybody is trustworthy to testify concerning where the Shabbat limit is, even slaves and female slaves who normally cannot testify.  In Ketuboth 2:10 we also learned that the rabbis allowed minors to testify where the Shabbat border was, or more precisely they allow a person who has reached majority age to testify where the Shabbat border was when they were a minor.  The mishnah explains that the rules concerning the Shabbat limit were meant to create leniencies, to allow people to travel further, and not to be stringent.  This is because going past the Shabbat limit is only a rabbinic prohibition (derabanan), and therefore in cases of doubt, the halakhah can be lenient.     


