Eruvin, Chapter One, Mishnah Ten

Introduction  
This mishnah continues to deal with setting up a partition around an encampment so that one may carry within the encampment.

Mishnah Ten
They may also surround [the camp] with reeds, provided there is no [gap of] three handbreadths between one reed and the next. 
[The rabbis] spoke only of a caravan, the words of Rabbi Judah.
But the sages say that they only spoke of a caravan because it is a usual occurrence.  
Any partition that is not [made up of] both vertical and horizontal [pieces] is not a valid partition, the words of Rabbi Yose bar Judah.  
But the sages say: one of the two [is sufficient].
They exempted four obligations [to soldiers] in an encampment: 
They may bring wood from anywhere; they are exempt from the washing of the hands, and from [separating tithes from] doubtfully tithed produce (demai) and from the setting up an eruv.

Explanation
Section one:  Yesterday we learned that they can set up a partition around the encampment by encircling it with three ropes, so long as there are no more than three handbreadths between each rope.  Today we see how a partition can be set up horizontally. This is done by setting up reeds (poles) around the encampment.  Between each reed there can be no more than three handbreadths, for less than three handbreadths is an amount that is legally considered as if it doesn’t exist.
Section two:  So far these mishnayot have only been speaking about surrounding a caravan with a partition.  The rabbis now debate whether the same type of partition may be used in other cases as well.  According to Rabbi Judah, the previous mishnayot relate only to the situation of a caravan.  An individual stuck out in an uninhabited place for Shabbat would have to make a partition of both horizontal and vertical pieces in order to carry within.  The other sages disagree and rule that the previous mishnayot mentioned the encamped caravan only because that was a normal situation.  The same rules would apply to other situations as well.
Section three:  Rabbi Yose disagrees with his father who held that for the caravan a partition of either horizontal ropes or vertical reeds is sufficient.  Rabbi Yose holds that a partition that does not have both is not a valid partition, neither for an individual nor for a caravan.  The sages continue to rule that a partition can be set up with either vertical or horizontal pieces, as we learned in the previous mishnayot. Both are not necessary.
Section four:   There are four ways in which the rabbis were lenient with regard to the rules governing soldiers in an encampment.  Note that these rules do not apply specifically to Shabbat; only the last one refers to Shabbat.  First of all, they may bring wood from anywhere they find it and it is not considered stealing.  Second, they need not wash their hands before eating.  Third, if they are eating doubtfully tithed produce (demai), they need not tithe it.  Tithing demai is only a rabbinic obligation and hence there is space to be lenient.  Fourth, to carry from tent to tent within the encampment, they do not need to set up an eruv (a communal meal).  A partition surrounding the encampment is sufficient, as we have learned.  
