Eruvin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
In mishnah three we learned that the maximum size of a garden or karpaf (enclosed area for storing wood) within which one may carry on Shabbat is two bet se’ah, or 5000 square cubits, the size of the mishkan (tabernacle) which was 100 cubits by 50 cubits.  Our mishnah discusses a square garden or karpaf.

Mishnah Five
Rabbi Judah ben Bava further said: a garden or a karpaf whose [area does not exceed] seventy cubits and a fraction by seventy cubits and a fraction, which is surrounded by a fence ten handbreadths high, it is permitted to carry within it, provided there is in it a watchman’s hut or a dwelling place or it is near to a town.  
Rabbi Judah says: even if it contained only a cistern, a ditch or a cave it is permitted to carry within it. 
Rabbi Akiva says: even if it contained none of these it is permitted to carry within it, provided its area [does not exceed] seventy cubits and a fraction by seventy cubits and a fraction. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: if its length exceeded its breadth even by a single cubit it is not permitted to carry within it.  
Rabbi Yose says: even if its length is twice its breadth it is permitted to carry within it.

Explanation
Section one:  If the garden or karpaf is square its sides can be 70 and a fraction cubits long.  Most commentators consider this “fraction” to be up to 2/3.  70 2/3 squared is 4993 7/9, a number pretty close to the maximum 5000 (the square root of 5000 is 70.71...).  Other commentators reckon the exact fraction slightly differently.  
Rabbi Judah ben Bava also requires that the garden or karpaf be at least partially enclosed to serve as living quarters (see mishnah three).  If it has a watchman’s hut, or is used even temporarily as a dwelling place he may carry witin it.  Additionally, if it is close enough to town (within 2000 cubits, the Shabbat limit—see introduction) then he frequently goes there and it is as if he lives in it.  If it does not meet these requirements Rabbi Judah ben Bava forbids carrying there.
Section two:  According to Rabbi Judah, in order to be allowed to carry in the garden or karpaf they need not serve as dwelling places, but they must have been enclosed to serve some purpose for human beings (and not just to store things).  A cistern and a ditch are used to collect rain water and a cave protects a person from the hot sun.
Section three:  Rabbi Akiva says that as long as the karpaf or garden do not exceed the maximum size, it is permitted to carry within them, no matter what they are used for.  
Section four: Rabbi Eliezer says that one can only carry in a square karpaf or garden and not in a rectangular one.
Section five:  Rabbi Yose says that the garden and karpaf can be rectangular or square.  They can even be more rectangular than the mishkan, whose length was twice its width (100 x 50 cubits).         
