Eruvin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah is a direct continuation of the second clause of yesterday’s mishnah.  To remind ourselves, Rabbi Akiva and the Sages had a debate concerning a person in one city who places his eruv in another city which is within the Shabbat border of his own city.  According to Rabbi Akiva, this is treated as a normal case—he may go 2000 cubits from his eruv and no more.  The Sages hold that the city itself only counts as four cubits and that he may continue to go beyond the city the distance which remains to him after traveling from the first city.  

Mishnah Nine
Rabbi Akiva said to them:  Do you not agree with me that one who puts his eruv in a cave may walk no further than two thousand cubits from the place of his eruv? 
They replied: when is this true? Only where no people dwell in it, but where people dwell in it one may walk through the whole of it and two thousand cubits beyond it. 
Thus [where an eruv is put] within [the cave] the law is more lenient than [where one is put] on top of it. 
And to the measurer, of whom they spoke, they give him a distance of two thousand cubits even if the end of his measure terminates within a cave.  

Explanation
Section one:  One who puts his eruv in a cave outside of his city, may travel another 2000 cubits outside of the eruv, including the length of the cave.  The cave does not count for just four cubits—rather each cubit within it counts.  Rabbi Akiva asks the sages why they agree concerning this halakhah but not concerning one who puts his eruv in a neighboring city.  In other words, why in the case of the city does the entire city only count as four cubits, no matter how large it is?
Section two:  The sages respond that the rule regarding one who puts his eruv in a cave is true only if no one lives in the cave.  The situation regarding the city is different—when he puts his eruv there he counts as one of its residents.  Just as the city’s residents may travel anywhere in the city and not have it count toward their 2000 cubits, so too he may travel anywhere in the city and not have it count towards his 2000 cubits.  
Section three:  This section is way of remembering the rule of the Sages in section two.  If the eruv is put on top of a cave which is in a city, then the eruv is in the city and he may walk within the entire city and not have it count toward his 2000 cubits.  However, if he puts the eruv in the cave below the city, the cave and certainly the city count toward his 2000 cubit limit. This means that the law is more lenient when the eruv is on top then when it is within.
Section four:  In this section the sages agree with Rabbi Akiva concerning one who measures his Shabbat border, that he gets only 2000 cubits, even if this measure ends in the middle of a cave.  Even if there are residents in the cave, he still cannot go through to the end of the cave, because his original Shabbat limit ended before he got there.  This matches what we learned in the beginning of yesterday’s mishnah, concerning a Shabbat border that ends within a neighboring city.  In such a case, he may only go up to the end of his Shabbat border.    
