Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a person who puts an eruv on both sides of the town, because he doesn’t know whether he will need to go to the west or to the east.  Normally, a person cannot make two eruvin and have them both be effective, because a person is considered to be where he left his eruv and he can’t be in both places.  The mishnah teaches that there is a way of getting around this problem by making a stipulation.

Mishnah Five
A man may make a stipulation concerning his eruv and say, “If foreigners came from the east, let my eruv be that of the west; 
[if they came] from the west let my eruv be that of the east; 
if they came from both directions, I will go in whatever direction I desire;
and if they came from neither direction I will be like the people of my town.”  
[Likewise say,] “If a sage came from the east let my eruv be that of the east;  
if from the west let my eruv be that of the west; 
If he came from either direction I will go in whatever direction I desire;
and if no one came from either direction I will be like the people of my town.”  
Rabbi Judah says: if one of them was his teacher he may go only to his teacher, but if both were his teachers he may go in whatever direction he prefers.

Explanation
Section one:  In this situation, he knows before Shabbat that foreigners may be coming and he wants to be able to run away from them to one of the sides of the town.  However, he doesn’t know from which direction they will be coming, so he puts an eruv (a meal) in both directions.  He then says, that if they come from the west, the valid eruv should be in the east and vice versa.  If they come from both directions, then he may choose whichever eruv he wishes.  Finally, if the foreigner doesn’t come after him, then he shall be like the other people in the city, who can go 2000 cubits in each direction without an eruv (2000 cubits is the Shabbat border).   Note that this mishnah is not referring to a life or death situation, for in such a situation the rules would be suspended in any case.
Section two:  In this situation, instead of foreigners coming to cause trouble, a sage is coming to give a derashah (expound upon the Torah) and he wants to go here the derashah.  He may again make a stipulation which will allow him the flexibility to have an eruv in either direction.
Rabbi Judah says that if one of the sages coming was his teacher, then he can only go to him.  This is because we assume that he wishes to hear his teacher and hence only the eruv on that side of the city is effective.  However if both are his teachers and they come from different directions he may choose freely between them.  

