Eruvin, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah does not seem to have anything to do with our chapter.  The previous mishnayot discussed measuring the city in order to determine the Shabbat border.  The topic is therefore “eruvei techumin”—Shabbat border eruvin which allow one to travel an added 2000 cubits outside of the city.  The remainder of the chapter will also deal with this subject.  This mishnah, in contrast, deals with “eruvei hatzerot”—courtyard eruvin, or “shitufei mevuoth”—alley partnerships, which allow people to carry within the city on Shabbat.  Traditional commentators struggled to understand what this mishnah is doing here and offered various solutions.  Abraham Goldberg, in his modern commentary to Mishnah Eruvin, suggests that there is a certain affinity in language between this mishnah and the preceding mishnayot, but his suggestion is also not without its difficulties.
In any case, the mishnah deals with an eruv/shittuf (partnership) that allows one to carry within a city.  A city that has a wall ten handbreadths high, and a gate that is locked at night, is treated like an alley, and hence if there is an “alley partnership”—meaning a shared meal (which for convenience sake I will call “an eruv”—people can carry within the entire city.  However, there is a difference in this matter between a privately owned city where an individual owns the city and rents out houses to others, and a city owned by many of its residents.  In a privately owned city, they may set up an eruv and everyone may carry in the entire city.   However, in a publicly owned city, they must leave one area that does not participate in the eruv.  This is done so that people don’t forget that it is forbidden to carry in the public domain without an eruv.  The area that does not participate in the city’s eruv may set up its own eruv for its own area, and carry within that area, but not throughout the rest of the city.  The mishnah deals with a city owned by an individual that becomes a publicly owned city and vice versa.  Similarly it deals with the size of the area that cannot participate in a publicly owned city eruv.  

Mishnah Six 
If a town that belonged to an individual was converted into one belonging to the many, they may make an eruv for the entire town.
But if a town belonged to the many and was converted into one belonging to an individual, they may not make an eruv for the entire town unless they excluded from it a section the size of the town of Hadashah in Judea, which contains fifty residents, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Shimon says: three courtyards each of which contains two houses.

Explanation
Section one:  As we explained above, for a town owned by an individual they may set up an eruv that allows all of the town’s residents to carry within the entire town.  Our mishnah teaches that even if this town is converted into one owned by the many, they still may set up an eruv for the entire town.  Its conversion does not affect its status.
Section two:  Similarly, a town which used to belong to the many and now is acquired by an individual is still treated as a town which belongs to the many.  Its status is also not affected by its conversion.  Therefore, they may not set up an eruv to allow people to carry in the entire town.  Rather they must exclude from the area which participates in the eruv a section the size of the town Hadashah in Judea.  “Hadashah” means new, and is mentioned in Joshua 15:37.  Here the name of the city is read “midrashically”—it is a new city which adds to the old city, sort of an appendage to the older city.  In this “New City”, there were 50 residents.  According to Rabbi Judah, by excluding an area this size, they may set up an eruv in the rest of the city.  
Rabbi Shimon disagrees and holds that the excluded part need only be an area the size of three courtyards, each of which has at least two homes.  This would probably yield an area slightly smaller than that according to Rabbi Judah’s ruling.  

