Eruvin, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah continues to discuss cases where a person does not participate in the eruv but in order that his lack of participation should not prevent the others from carrying, he gives away his share in the courtyard or alley.

Mishnah Four
When must they give away their share [courtyard or alley]?   
Bet Shammai says: while it is yet day, 
And Bet Hillel says: after dusk. 
One who gave away his share and then carried out an object, whether unwittingly or intentionally, he restricts [the others from carrying in the courtyard or alley], the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Judah says: if he acted with intention he restricts [the others], but if unwittingly he does not restrict.

Explanation
Section one:  According to Bet Shammai, he must give away his share in the ownership of the courtyard or alley before Shabbat begins, because it is prohibited to engage in any type of business on Shabbat.  Bet Hillel says that it is permitted even after Shabbat has begun.  In other versions of this mishnah Bet Hillel says “even after dusk”, a text that matches my explanation above.  Bet Hillel does not consider relinquishing ownership to be business and hence it is permitted to do so on Shabbat.
Section two:  This person gave away his share in the courtyard, thereby allowing the others who shared in the eruv to carry there.  He is not allowed to carry from his own home to the courtyard, which now doesn’t belong to them.  If he does carry his stuff out of his house and into the courtyard he is in essence reneging on his annulment of courtyard ownership.  He now regains his share in the courtyard and thereby prohibits the eruv’s effectiveness for the others (since he didn’t participate in the eruv).  Rabbi Judah says that he is only reneging on his annulment if he carries his things out intentionally.  Rabbi Meir says that his actions cause the others to be restricted whether he carried things out intentionally or unwittingly. He prohibits in the case of the latter, lest one come to permit even in the former.  In other words, if the law were lenient in a case where he carried out unwittingly, people would be lenient in a case where he carried things out intentionally.  

