Eruvin, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
This mishnah deals with what constitutes a wall between two courtyards.  

Mishnah Two
If a wall between two courtyards was ten handbreadths high and four handbreadths thick, two eruvin must be prepared, but not one.   
If there was produce on top of it, the [residents] from this side may climb up and eat and those from this side may climb up and eat, provided they do not bring it down. 
If the wall was breached a breach of ten cubits, the residents prepare two eruvin or, if they prefer, they prepare one eruv, because it is like a doorway. 
If the breach was bigger, only one eruv and not two may be prepared.

Explanation
Section one:   In order for the wall to count as a full partition between the two courtyards, it needs to be ten handbreadths high.  Such a wall fully separates the two, such that each must make their own eruv. 
According to the Yerushalmi, although the mishnah says that the wall must be four handbreadths thick, even a wall less thick still counts as a full partition.  The mishnah mentions a thickness of four handbreadths because of clause 2, which says that they may not bring the fruit down.  According to the Yerushalmi, if the wall is less than four handbreadths wide it is not its own domain, and one can take produce down from there.
Section two:  The top of a ten handbreadth high, four handbreadth wide wall is a domain unto itself, and therefore, one cannot take something down from there to another domain.  However, people from either side may climb up and eat the produce while sitting on top of the wall.
Section three:  A breach of less than ten cubits can count as a doorway, and therefore, the residents of the two courtyards may make either separate eruvin, or one eruv for both courtyards.  The advantage to making two different eruvin is that if one of those from one courtyard does not participate in the eruv, those of the other courtyard will still be able to carry within their own courtyard.  The advantage to making one eruv is that it is obviously easier (and slightly cheaper) to set up one eruv than two.
Section four:  If the breach in the wall is greater than ten cubits the breach cannot be considered a doorway and we must consider the two courtyards to be one.  This would mean that if one person from either courtyard does not participate, none of the residents of either courtyard may carry.
    

