Eruvin, Chapter One, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
In this mishnah Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel debate how one validates an alley such that it is permitted to carry within it. 

Mishnah Two
The validation of an alley:  
Bet Shammai says: a side-post and a crossbeam.
And Bet Hillel says: either a side-post or a crossbeam. 
R. Eliezer says: two side-posts. 
In the name of Rabbi Ishmael one student stated in front of Rabbi Akiva: Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel did not disagree concerning an alley that was less than four cubits [in width], that it [may be validated] by either a side-post or a crossbeam. About what did they disagree?  In the case of one that was wider than four, and narrower than ten cubits:  Bet Shammai says: both a side-post and a crossbeam [are required] and Bet Hillel says: either a side-post or a crossbeam. 
Rabbi Akiva said they disagree about both cases. 

Explanation
There are two levels of debates in this mishnah. There is a debate between Bet Shammai, Bet Hillel and R. Eliezer about how one validates an alley.  The second debate is between Rabbi Ishmael, as presented by one of his students, and Rabbi Akiva over what was the actual dispute between Bet Hillel and Bet Shammai.
Section one:  In this version, Bet Shammai says that the alley must have the side-post and a crossbeam in order to carry in it, whereas Bet Hillel says that either is sufficient.  Rabbi Eliezer says that the crossbeam is irrelevant and that what are needed are two side-posts.
Section two:  In this statement, a student of Rabbi Ishmael’s comes in front of Rabbi Akiva to present a more limited version of the debate.  According to this version, both houses agree that if the alley is less than four cubits wide, either a side-post or crossbeam is sufficient.  Probably the reason that Bet Shammai agrees in this case is that if the entrance is narrower it is clearer that this is not a public domain.  The debate is only when the entrance is between four and ten cubits wide.  
Rabbi Akiva rejects this version and rules that in both cases, Bet Hillel and Bet Shammai disagree.  The first section of the mishnah is therefore representative of Rabbi Akiva’s position.
As an aside, we can learn a fair amount of rabbinic history from this mishnah.  Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael were the heads of competing academies, some time in the early part of the second century CE.  Both academies produced midrashic compilations that while similar to each, have notable differences.  This mishnah is one indicator that Rabbi Akiva’s academy became more dominant, perhaps especially so after Rabbi Ishmael’s demise.  Rabbi Ishmael’s students come in front of Rabbi Akiva to see if their traditions are acceptable in his eyes.  This is a sign of their turning to his authority, probably after their own master’s death.  Rabbi Akiva rejects the Ishmaelian tradition and the anonymous piece which opens the mishnah is taught according to Rabbi Akiva.  Indeed, the Mishnah is a work produced by the Akivan academy, a work in which Akiva’s students, most notably Rabbis Judah, Meir, Shimon and Yose dominate.     

