Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
One who is walking on a road and arrives within 2000 cubits of the city by dusk and intends to spend Shabbat in the city, is considered as a resident of the town and may walk throughout it and 2000 cubits around it, even though he didn’t get there until after nightfall.  He is considered to be like the people of the town.  
Our mishnah talks about one who gets to within these 2000 cubits but does not realize he has done so and does not, therefore, have intention to spend Shabbat in that town.  

Mishnah Four
One who sat down on the road [at dusk on Friday eve] and then got up and saw that he was near a town he may not enter it, since it had not been his intention to do so, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Judah says: he may enter it.  
Rabbi Judah said: it once actually happened and Rabbi Tarfon entered the town, even though this was not his intention [when Shabbat had begun].

Explanation
The mishnah talks about a person who was walking on the road on Friday and sat down to rest at dusk.  This now becomes his Shabbat place, and the border should be two thousand cubits in all directions.  He then notices that he is within the Shabbat border of a town. According to Rabbi Meir, he is not considered as a member of the town, since he did not have the intention to spend Shabbat in that town. Therefore, he may only go 2000 cubits from where he was when Shabbat began (at dusk).  If that means he can only walk up until a certain point in the town, then he can go no further, even within the town.  
Rabbi Judah says that he may enter the town, since if he knew when he sat down at dusk that he was that so close to the town, he surely would have entered the town.  Therefore, his intention to spend Shabbat at that particular place outside of the town was actually a mistake.  We should note that if he did notice the city before Shabbat and intentionally did not enter, then Rabbi Judah would agree that he can go only 2000 cubits from the point where he was when Shabbat began.
Rabbi Judah proves that his halakhah is correct from a story concerning Rabbi Tarfon.  Proving one’s halakhah with an actual occurrence is considered a strong means by which to prove something.    

