Eruvin, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with a situation where a public road cuts through the enclosure around the well.  The second section, which is the conclusion to the Mishnah’s discussion of this enclosure, teaches which types of wells and cisterns may be surrounded with this type of enclosure.

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Judah says: if a public road cuts through them it should be diverted to one side;  
But the sages say: this is not necessary.
Both for a public cistern, a public well as well as a private well, they may make [an enclosure] of posts, but for a private cistern, they must make a partition ten handbreadths high, the words of Rabbi Akiva. 
Rabbi Judah ben Baba says: they make [an enclosure] of posts for a public well only while for the others they must make a belt ten handbreadths high.

Explanation
Section one:  By surrounding the well with a pseudo-fence, the area is transformed from a public domain to a non-public domain (although not necessarily a private domain).  According to Rabbi Judah, if a public road cuts through the enclosure, it would remain a public domain, because the fence surrounding the enclosure is not a full fence.  In such a situation it would be forbidden to draw water from the well on Shabbat.  Therefore, the public road must be diverted.
The sages say that this is not necessary since there is a fence surrounding the area.  Even though this fence does not fully surround the area, it is sufficient such that the fact that the public uses the road does not nullify it.  
Section two:  A well is a structure through which one draws water from an underground spring.  A cistern is filled with rain water or water drawn from an aqueduct.  According to Rabbi Akiva they may make the above-described enclosure around all of these structures on Shabbat so that they can draw water, with the exception of a private cistern.  The reason that this type of enclosure may not be made around a private well is that the water may dry up on Shabbat.  The fence around the enclosure is a special rabbinic enactment which permits carrying only while there is water in the well/cistern.  The waters of a well will not dry up.  Furthermore, since this cistern is owned by a private individual, she/he may forget that it is forbidden to carry into the public domain.  At a publicly-owned cistern people will remind each other that this is forbidden.    
Rabbi Judah ben Baba says that this enactment applies only to a publicly-owned well.  It does not apply to cisterns, and even public ones, because their water may dry up.  It does not apply to a private well because at a private well an individual may forget that it is forbidden to carry from the private domain to the public domain.
In order to draw water from a public cistern or a private well or cistern they have to rope the entire area off.    
