Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Six

Introduction
This mishnah deals with standing in one domain and drinking from another.  

Mishnah Six
A man may not stand in a private domain and drink in the public domain or stand in a public domain and drink in a private domain unless he puts his head and the greater part of his body into the domain in which he drinks. 
And similarly concerning a winepress.
A man may intercept water from a gutter at a level below ten handbreadths, 
And from a water-spout he may drink in any manner.  

Explanation
Section one:  If one stands in one domain and drinks from another, he is considered to be bringing water from one domain to the other.  This is the opposite of the case of urinating in the previous mishnah.  However, this is permitted if his head and most of his body are in the domain in which he is drinking.  Even though his legs are in the other domain, since the water won’t really go directly down to his legs this is permitted.
Section two:  The same rule as above also applies to standing outside of a winepress and drinking directly from the winepress.  This is prohibited unless his head and most of his body is in the area of the winepress.  The Talmud explains that this is prohibited even if the winepress is only a karmelit and not a private domain.
Section three:  This refers to someone standing in the public domain who wishes to collect the runoff rainwater overflowing from the gutters on a roof.  He may not collect this water directly from the gutter because the gutter is in the private domain and he is in the public domain.  What he should do is put his vessel ten handbreadths within the ground of the public domain and catch the water there. Once the water is within the ten handbreadths mark it is already in the public domain and he is therefore not taking water from one domain to another.
Section four:  Whereas the gutter goes all the way around the wall, the water spout goes straight from the wall emptying out in the public domain.  It does not have the status of a private domain and therefore he may drink directly from it.  
