Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah is a continuation of yesterday’s mishnah, in which we discussed carrying tefillin in from the public domain. 

Mishnah Two
Rabbi Shimon says: he should pass them [the tefillin] to his fellow and his fellow should pass them to his fellow, and so on, until they reach the outermost courtyard. 
The same is true in the case of his child:  he passes him to his fellow and his fellow passes him to his fellow, and so on, even if there are a hundred. 
Rabbi Judah says: one may pass a jar to his fellow and his fellow may pass it to his fellow even beyond the Shabbat limit.  
They said to him: this must not go further than the feet of its owner. 

Explanation 
Section one:  Rabbi Shimon is more lenient than the sages in the previous mishnah concerning bringing tefillin in from the public domain.  While he also obviously cannot just allow a person to carry them in himself since this would be a toraitic prohibition, he does allow one to pass them in from person to person. Since no single person carries the tefillin more than four cubits in the public domain (which would be a toraitic transgression) this is allowed in order to protect the tefillin.  Once the tefillin get to the outermost courtyard, where they will be protected, they shouldn’t pass them any further.
Section two:  This refers to a child who is born out on the field on Shabbat.  The father (or anyone else) may not just carry him, since carrying a child who cannot walk on his own is a violation of carrying on Shabbat.  Rather what he should do, according to Rabbi Shimon, is pass him from person to person until the child reaches the city.  
According to the Talmud, the other sages disagree with Rabbi Shimon and hold that in cases such as this, it would be better for one person to carry the child all the way back, as long as he stops to rest before he walks four cubits at one time.  In such a way, he does not commit a toraitic transgression of Shabbat.  This is preferred because this involves far less people than does Rabbi Shimon’s suggestion.  In contrast, Rabbi Shimon reasons that advising someone to carry for a distance of less than four cubits at a time is dangerous because he may easily walk too far and thereby commit a toraitic transgression.  We see here that there is a debate over what is worse—the appearance of many people together carrying something on Shabbat, or the possibility that one person may commit an actual toraitic transgression.  
Section three:  Rabbi Judah extends the halakhah stated by Rabbi Shimon above to include a situation where someone is stuck outside of the Shabbat border and need food or water on Shabbat.  People from within the city may pass food or water out to him, even if it goes beyond the Shabbat limit.  The sages partially disagree and hold that one may not pass something beyond the place to which the object’s owner may himself go.  If the owner was dwelling in the city when Shabbat began, then just as he may not go beyond the Shabbat limit, so too his belongings may not be passed beyond that limit.     
