Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
This mishnah deals with standing in one domain and opening a door in another domain.  

Mishnah Nine
A man may not stand in a private domain and open a door in the public domain, or in the public domain and open a door in a private domain, unless he has made a partition ten handbreadths high, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
They said to him: it happened at the [oxen and chicken] fatteners’ market in Jerusalem that they would lock their shops and leave the key in a window above a shop door. 
Rabbi Yose says: it was the wool-dealers’ market.

Explanation
Section one:  The person in this mishnah is standing in one domain and wants to open a door with a lock in another domain. The key is already in the other domain, the one in which the door is located, for if it were not, it would be obviously prohibited to move the key from one domain to the other.  Rabbi Meir rules that this is prohibited lest after he is done unlocking the door, he pulls the key back into the domain in which he is in, thereby moving it from one domain to another.  The only way that this is permitted is if he makes a partition ten handbreadths high.  For instance, if he is in the private domain and the door is in the public domain, he could make a partition ten handbreadths high in the public domain, in the area where the key is, so that he and the key would both be in private domains.  Alternatively, if he is in the public domain, he could make a ten handbreadth high partition where he is and then he may open the door which is also in a private domain.
Section two:   The people who worked in a certain type of market in Jerusalem would stand in the public domain and lock their shops and leave the key in the window (the key must never have been in the public domain). From here we can see that it is permitted to stand in one domain and lock a door in another.
There is a debate in the mishnah over what type of market it was.  According to the first opinion it was a “fattener’s market” where they would fatten up fowl and cattle before slaughtering them.  According to Rabbi Yose it was a wool market.  However, the actual content of the halakhah is not debated.    

