Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
This mishnah discusses the status of certain structures within a courtyard.  As we shall learn, only places that are considered to be “dwelling places” are considered in dealing with various laws of eruvin.

Mishnah Four
If one put his eruv in a gate-house, a portico or a gallery it is not a valid eruv;   
And one who dwells in it does not prohibit [others from carrying if he doesn’t participate in the eruv].   
[If one put his eruv] in a straw-shed, a cattle-shed, a wood-shed or storehouse it is a valid eruv;   
And one who dwells in it prohibits [others from carrying if he doesn’t participate in the eruv].   
Rabbi Judah says: if the householder has there any ownership the resident does not prohibit.

Explanation
Section one:  The gate-house is a hut in the courtyard in which the guard sits.  The “portico” is an open but covered area in front of the house.  Pillars hold the roof up.  The gallery was explained in yesterday’s mishnah.  Since these are not dwelling places, one cannot put the eruv (the meal) in them.  The eruv must be put in a place that is considered to be a place of dwelling.  Furthermore, since these are not normal dwelling places if a person does dwell there and does not participate in the eruv, he doesn’t prohibit the other people of the courtyard from using the eruv, as would a resident in a normal dwelling place who did not participate in the eruv.  
Section two:  In contrast, the straw-shed, cattle-shed, wood-shed and storehouse are considered to be dwelling places and therefore an eruv which is put there is valid.  Since these are considered living places, if someone who dwells there does not participate in the eruv, he renders the eruv ineffective and prohibits the other residents of the courtyard from carrying there.  
Rabbi Judah refines the previous halakhah and says that if the householder owns rights to one of the sheds, the fact that the person who dwells there doesn’t participate in the eruv does not render it invalid.  Even if the homeowner only has the right to use the shed, without actually owning the shed at all, the shed-dweller’s ownership is not considered complete.  Only if the person who dwells in the shed fully owns it and the homeowner has no rights to it, then the shed-dweller renders the eruv ineffective if he doesn’t participate.  


