Eruvin, Chapter Three, Mishnah Two

Introduction 
The first section of this mishnah deals with foods that may or may not be used to set up an eruv. 
The second section deals with sending an eruv (a meal) with an agent.

Mishnah Two
They may make an eruv with demai (doubtfully tithed produce), or with first tithe from which terumah had been taken, or with second tithe or consecrated [food] that have been redeemed; and priests [may make their eruv] with hallah and terumah.  
[It may] not [be prepared], with untithed produce, nor with first tithe from which terumah has not been taken, nor with second tithe or consecrated [food] that have not been redeemed.
One who sends his eruv in the hands of a deaf-mute, imbecile or a minor, or with one who does not admit [the principle of] eruv, the eruv is not valid. 
If, however, he instructed another person to receive it from him, the eruv is valid.

Explanation 
Section one:  All of the things listed in this section are not completely prohibited, at least not by the Torah.  Demai is doubtfully tithed produce, which may be given to poor people.  First tithe may be eaten by Levites, once the terumah has been removed and given to the priest.  Once second tithe and consecrated food are redeemed they may be eaten (the money is taken to Jerusalem and used their to buy food).  Priests may use hallah and terumah to make their eruv.  Hallah refers to the separated dough that Israelites must give to priests.  In yesterday’s mishnah we learned that all people may make their eruv from terumah and not just priests.  This seemingly contradicts today’s mishnah which specifies that only priests may use terumah, since only they can eat it.  There are two answers to this problem:  1) priests commonly use terumah to make their eruv.  2)  Mishnah Pesahim 2:5, a mishnah which deals with the types of grains which can be used for matzah, contains the exact same line.  There it can refer only to priests, since Israelites could not eat terumah.  Our mishnah copied the list from that mishnah.
The list that follows is of foods which may not be consumed by anyone.  Since no one can eat these things, they may not be used in making an eruv.
Section three:  This section deals with a person who sends an agent to set up an eruv (meaning a meal) at the end of his Shabbat border, that is 2000 cubits outside of the city, or wherever else he may be.  The mishnah teaches that if the person sent it with a deaf-mute, an imbecile or a minor, the eruv cannot be relied upon.  According to the rabbis, these people lack the intelligence which is necessary to have the proper intention to set up an eruv.  He also cannot send the eruv with someone who does not believe in the halakhic viability of eruvin, since that person will obviously not intend to set up a proper eruv.
However, if he sends it with one of these people in order to bring it to someone else who will actually set up the eruv, then the eruv is valid.  
We should note that this mishnah alludes to people who deny the validity of eruvin.  The Talmud comments that this is a reference to the Samaritans who took the Exodus 16:29, “no man should leave his place” literally.  This is a classic case where we can see that not all Jews in the time of the Mishnah accepted rabbinic midrash and that there were those who read the Bible far more literally than did the rabbis.  



