Eruvin, Chapter Six, Mishnah Two

Introduction
According to the Talmud, in this mishnah Rabban Gamaliel disagrees with the opinion in yesterday’s mishnah. There we learned that a Jew who doesn’t believe in the efficacy of eruvin causes the other Jews in his courtyard or alley to be prohibited from carrying, by making their eruv ineffective.  According to the Talmud, while the non-Jew can annul his partnership in the courtyard or alley, and thereby let the other Jews eruv be effective, a Jew who doesn’t believe in eruvin, such as a Sadducee or Samaritan cannot do so.  Rabban Gamaliel says that even a Sadducee can annul his share in the alley or courtyard.  Our mishnah deals with one who has already made such an annulment.  The question is, can his annulment be overturned by his actions?
 
Mishnah Two
Rabban Gamaliel said: A Sadducee once lived with us in the same alley in Jerusalem and father told us:  “Hurry up and carry out all vessels into the alley before he carries out his and thereby restricts you”.   
Rabbi Judah said [the instruction was given] in different language:  “Hurry up and perform all of your needs in the alley before he carries out his and thereby restricts you”. 

Explanation
Section one:  According to the explanation provided above, this Sadducee who lived in the same alley (!) as Rabban Gamaliel’s father, Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel, nullified his partial ownership in the alley such that the eruv of the Jews would be effective.  (A rather nice Sadducee—if he was a Samaritan, we could call him the “Good Samaritan”!).  However, Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel holds that if afterwards, on Shabbat, the Sadducee uses the alley to carry out his things then he has reneged on his renunciation and he again owns a share of the alley. Therefore, the Jews must use the alley to carry on Shabbat, so that they own the alley before he does.  Once they have demonstrated such ownership, even if he uses the alley, this does not make it prohibited for them to carry there.
Section two: According to the Talmud, section one is Rabbi Meir’s version, of what Rabban Gamaliel said his father said.   Rabbi Judah agrees with Rabban Gamaliel, that a Sadducee can renounce his ownership.  However, he disagrees with Rabbi Meir concerning the precise language of Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel’s statement.  According to Rabbi Judah, even if the other Jews use the alley first, if the Sadducee then comes to use it, he will cause it to be prohibited for them to carry there.  Therefore, the Jews must carry all of the things that they need to carry before the Sadducee uses the alley.  Once he uses it, it is prohibited to them.  
