Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah One

Introduction
We have already learned several times that it is forbidden to go beyond a Shabbat border of 2000 cubits, measured from where a person is or the town in which he is in when Shabbat begins.  Our mishnah deals with a person who finds himself against his will outside of this border.
 
Mishnah One 
One whom Gentiles, or an evil spirit, have taken out [beyond the Shabbat border] has no more than four cubits [in which to move].  
If they brought him back, it is as if he had never gone out.  
If they took him to another town, or if they put him in a pen or a sahar:
Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah say he may move throughout the entire area;  
But Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Akiva says: he has only four cubits [in which to move].
It once happened that they were coming from Brindisi and their ship sailed out to sea [on Shabbat].  Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah walked about throughout its area, but Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Akiba did not move beyond four cubits because they wanted to be stringent upon themselves.

Explanation
Section one:   In this case a person was taken out of his Shabbat border against his will, either by Gentiles or by an evil spirit (i.e. he lost his wits).  Despite the fact that this is not his fault, once outside his border he may not move more than four cubits in any direction. This is the same rule as for one who left his Shabbat border intentionally—he may move only four cubits.  The idea comes from Exodus 16:29, “Let everyone remain where he is.”  Four cubits is composed of three for a person’s body and one so he can stretch out his legs—in other words, that is “where he is.”  
Section two:  He is not allowed to return to his town but if the Gentiles or evil spirit brings him back he returns to being like the other people of his town, who may go anywhere in the town and 2000 cubits outside of it in each direction.  The Talmud notes that if he returns intentionally or if he left intentionally but was returned by Gentiles, he does not return to being able to go anywhere in the town, but rather even within the town he may only go four cubits.
Section three:  In this section he is taken out of the town where he began Shabbat and moved to another town.  Alternatively, he is taken out of his town and put into a pen or sahar (a type of pen, see above 3:2) in which one may walk without limit on Shabbat.  According to Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah, he may walk throughout either the city or the pen, and we treat the situation as if he began Shabbat there.  Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Akiva disagree and hold that since he did not begin Shabbat there he is only allowed to walk four cubits. 
Section four: In this story, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Akiva, Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah are on an anchored boat when Shabbat begins.  In this situation they can walk throughout the entire boat, although they may not disembark on Shabbat.  The boat then sailed off without their consent and went past their Shabbat limit.  The latter two rabbis continued to walk about the boat, because they hold that if Gentiles (the sailors in this case) take a Jew beyond his Shabbat limit to another town, he is treated as a person who began Shabbat in that town.  Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Akiva remained within four cubits, just as they held with regard to a person taken out of his town and brought to another town.  However, the mishnah notes that this is not the law but rather a stringency.  The halakhah itself distinguishes between a person who is taken from one town to another and one whose ship sets sail for two reasons.  First of all, Rabbi Joshua and Rabbi Akiva were on the ship when Shabbat began and therefore when Shabbat began they could walk throughout the entire ship.   Secondly, a ship’s position is constantly changing such that no one can truly stay within four cubits in any case.  They probably wished to be strict upon themselves so that people wouldn’t think that in the case of a person brought to a pen or another city he too may walk throughout the entire area.  

