Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
A court may give someone permission to go beyond the Shabbat limit so that he can go to Jerusalem to testify that he saw the new moon, or so that he may go somewher to save property from marauders.  Our mishnah deals with a person who was given permission to go out and then found out that what he set out to do was already accomplished.

Mishnah Three
One who went beyond the Shabbat limit with permission and was then told that the act had already been performed, [he is allowed to move] within two thousand cubits in any direction. 
If he was within the Shabbat limit, it is as if he had not gone out.  
All who go out to save life may return to their original places. 

Explanation
Section one:  A person was given permission to go beyond the Shabbat limit either to testify concerning the new month or to save property.  Once beyond the limit he heard from someone else that what he set out to do had already been done.  The question is, what is he to do now?  Is he stuck within his four cubits?  The answer is that he retains his right to walk 2000 cubits in all directions.  The rabbis did not want to penalize this person for if they did they might discourage people from setting out to testify concerning the new month.  
Section two:  If those 2000 cubits which he is given once he finds out that he doesn’t need to go any further bring him back into his old Shabbat limit, which is within 2000 cubits of the town where he began Shabbat, it is now as if he never left.  He may go throughout the town and a 2000 cubit perimeter around the town.  Again, the rabbis wished to be lenient with this person because he left his Shabbat limit for a sanctioned purpose.
Section three: Anybody who goes out to save a life may return to the place from where he comes.  If they did not allow this, people might have refrained from traveling to save a life.  The rabbis were lenient not just concerning traveling somewhere to save someone’s life, but also concerning traveling back.  

