Eruvin, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction 
This mishnah goes back to discussing courtyard eruvin.

Mishnah Three
If the tenants of a courtyard and the tenants of its gallery forgot and did not participate [together] in the eruv, anything that is higher than ten handbreadths belongs to the [residents of the] gallery, and anything lower belongs to the [residents of the] courtyard.   
The rim around a cistern, or a rock, if they are ten handbreadths high they belong to the gallery but if lower than they belong to the courtyard.   
To what does this apply? To one that is adjacent to the gallery, but one that is distanced from it, even if ten handbreadths high, belongs to the courtyard. 
And what is regarded as adjacent? One that is not further than four handbreadths.

Explanation
Section one:  The “gallery” is like a porch off the second floor of a building.  It is open to the building and it has steps that lead down to the courtyard.  The tenants of the lower floor and those of the upper floor forgot to jointly set up the eruv so that the people from the upper floor could carry in the courtyard.  Rather each set of residents set up their own eruv.  The mishnah rules that anything that is in the courtyard that is above ten handbreadths is considered to be in the domain of the people who live on the upper floor, and they may use it and anything on it, and carry while in those areas.  Those of the lower floor may use only that which is lower than ten handbreadths.  In other words, we divide the domain at ten handbreadths high—anything above belongs to the upper eruv and anything below belongs to the lower eruv.  The reason is that above ten handbreadths is easier for those on the upper floor to use, while things below are easier for those on the lower floor to use.
Section two:  They used to build a rim of earth around a cistern to serve as the cistern’s railing so people wouldn’t fall in.  If this rim, or any rock in the courtyard is higher than ten handbreadths high, then it belongs to the residents of the gallery.  If it is lower than that, then only the residents of the courtyard may use it.  The mishnah mentions these because they are normal examples of things found in a courtyard that may be more than ten handbreadths high.
Section three:  The previous rule only applies to things that are adjacent to the gallery.  If they are within four handbreadths, then the people who live on the upper floor can reach over and use these areas.  However, if they are farther away, then even something above ten handbreadths can be used only by the residents of the courtyard.    
