Eruvin, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah deals with situations in which an area, either a roof or a courtyard, is missing one wall.  As we shall see, if the wall is totally missing, it is prohibited to carry in this area.  

Mishnah Two
A large roof close to a small roof: the large one is permitted but that of the small one is forbidden.   
If [the wall of a] large courtyard which shared a wall with a small courtyard was broken down, the use of  the large one is permitted, but that of the smaller one is forbidden, because the gap is like a doorway to the large one.
If [the wall of a] courtyard which shared a wall with the public domain was broken down, one who brings from it into a private domain or from a private domain into it is liable, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. 
The sages say: from it into the public domain or from the public domain into it he is exempt because it is like a karmelit.  

Explanation
Section one:   The mishnah describes a situation where there is a large roof and a small roof that share one wall.  The fourth wall of the small roof is totally open to the large roof. Since the small roof has only three closed walls, it is forbidden to carry on the small roof.  However, the large roof’s fourth side is not completely open to the small roof; only the middle part of that side is open.  At the ends of each side, there would be existing sections of walls.  These partial walls count as a full wall and it is permitted to carry on the larger roof.
Section two:  This section is exactly the same situation as above, but it describes courtyards instead of roofs. The gap in the wall is like a doorway for the larger courtyard, but for the small courtyard the gap means that it is simply a missing wall.  Therefore, it is forbidden to carry in the smaller courtyard.  
Section three:  In this case, the wall of a courtyard is broken and opens to the public domain.  The wall is either completely fallen down, or at least 10 cubits of it have fallen down.  According to Rabbi Eliezer, the courtyard now has the same status as that of the public domain.  Therefore, one who carries from there into another private domain or from a private domain into there is liable for transgressing Shabbat.  The rabbis disagree with Rabbi Eliezer and say that the courtyard has the status of a karmelit, a domain which is neither like the public domain nor like the private domain.  Hence, while it is still forbidden to carry an object in or out of this area, one who does so is not liable for a toraitic transgression of Shabbat.   
  

