Eruvin, Chapter Ten, Mishnah Eight

Introduction 
The first part of this mishnah deals with carrying below the branches of a tree and sitting on a tree’s roots.  The second part of the mishnah deals with setting up a make-shift door.  

Mishnah Eight
If a tree overshadows the ground:  if its branches are not higher than three handbreadths from the ground it is permitted to carry underneath it.   
If its roots are three handbreadths high above the ground, one may not sit on them. 
With the door in the “muktzeh”, and the thorns in the breach [of a wall] and reed mats, one may not close an opening, unless they are high off the ground.  

Explanation
Section one:  If a tree’s branches lie within three handbreadths from the ground it is as if they are attached to the ground.  This is a special rule that is applied in certain circumstances according to which anything that is three handbreadths from the ground it is as if it is attached to the ground.  Assumedly the branches are at least ten handbreadths high and therefore they act as partitions.  The area in between the branches is therefore considered a private domain and it is permitted to carry there.
Section two:  On Shabbat it is forbidden to climb on or make any use of a tree, lest by doing so one comes to break off a branch, an activity which is forbidden.  The mishnah teaches that if the roots are higher than three handbreadths one may not sit on them, since they are part of the tree.  However, if they are less than three handbreadths than they are part of the ground and it is permitted to sit on them.
Section three:  In this context “muktzeh” refers to a backyard separate from the courtyard which was used usually for storage.  Since people didn’t regularly go in and out of the muktzeh and it was only used to store items which were not particularly valuable (like produce and wood) it did not have a regular door, with a hinge and lock. Rather the door was just propped up against the opening in the wall and when people went in, they would take the door down and lay it on the ground. 
The thorns referred to here were used to fill up holes in a wall.
The mishnah says that it is forbidden to use these three things (the muktzeh door, the thorns and the reed mats) to make a door. The reason is that these are not actually doors (which have hinges and locks) and therefore one who puts them into the opening of the wall looks like he is building, and not just putting a door in its place.  In other words, this is prohibited because it looks too much like building.  However, if when placing them he raised them from the ground, then it is clearer that he is not building and it is permitted.
Others explain differently.  They explain that these three things will make furrows in the ground when the door is opened and it is forbidden on Shabbat to make furrows.  Therefore, if he wishes to use them as a door, he must lift them a little off the ground so that they won’t make furrows.     
