Eruvin, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eleven

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with someone who goes beyond the Shabbat limit without having permission to do so. The second mishnah deals with someone who is just outside the city’s Shabbat limits on Friday when dusk comes.  In both cases the issue at hand is may he enter the Shabbat limit after Shabbat has begun.

Mishnah Eleven 
One who went out beyond his Shabbat limit, even one cubit may not re-enter. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: [if he went] two cubits [beyond his Shabbat limit] he may re-enter, three cubits he may not re-enter. 
One who was overtaken by dusk when only one cubit [outside the Shabbat limit] may not enter [the Shabbat border]. 
Rabbi Shimon says: even if he was fifteen cubits away he may enter since the surveyors do not measure exactly on account of those who err. 

Explanation
Section one: According to the first opinion in the mishnah, once someone goes beyond his Shabbat limit, he may not come back inside the border.  He may now move only four cubits in each direction.  
Rabbi Eliezer holds that if he is two cubits or less outside the border, he may come back in.  According to Rabbi Eliezer a person can always walk two cubits in each direction (above mishnah five) and therefore he can come back into the border.  However, if he is more than two cubits outside the border he may not come back.
Section two:  If the person is not within the Shabbat border at dusk, he may not enter after Shabbat begins, even if he is only one cubit outside the border.  If he intended for that place to be his “Shabbat place” then he may walk 2000 cubits in all directions, but he may not enter the city.  The Talmud Yerushalmi explains that Rabbi Eliezer also disagrees with this clause and holds that if he is within two cubits of the border, he may enter.
Rabbi Shimon holds that even if he is fifteen cubits outside of the border, he still may enter because when the surveyors set up their marks of Shabbat limits, they do not measure precisely.  This is explained in two different ways. One explanation is that the surveyors leave fifteen cubits extra so that if people take a few steps beyond the Shabbat limit, they can come back.  The other explanation is that the surveyors themselves make mistakes and these mistakes are typically up to fifteen cubits.     

