Menahot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Four
 
Mishnah Four
One may mix the drink-offerings of bulls with the drink-offerings of rams, or the drink-offerings of lambs with the drink-offerings of other lambs, or those of an individual offering with those of a communal offering, or those of [an offering offered] today with those of [an offering offered] yesterday;  
But one may not mix the drink-offerings of lambs with the drink-offerings of bulls or of rams.  
If they mixed these on their own, and they mixed these on their own, and then they were mixed, they are valid.
But if before each was mixed by itself [they were mixed together], they are invalid.
Although the minhah of the lamb that was offered with the omer was doubled, its drink-offerings were not doubled. 

Explanation
Section one: The principle here is that the ratio of grain to oil in the minhah offered with bulls is the same as that of the lambs. When it comes to bulls there are six logs of oil for three-tenths of grain, two logs per tenth. With rams it is four logs of oil for two-tenths, so the ratio is the same. Therefore if they are mixed up together, the drink-offerings (grain and oil) are still valid. So too with all of the other offerings listed in this section, as long as the ratio is the same, they are all valid.
Section two: The ratio of the grain and oil for a lamb is three logs for a tenth, so these drink-offerings cannot be mixed together with those of bulls or rams.
Section three: However, if one first mixes the oil and grain for each offering on its own, and then they become mixed up, they are still valid, and one can offer them on the altar. If the different drink-offerings were first mixed up together before the oil and grain of each offering was mixed up on its own, then they are invalid.  
Section four: The grain for the minhah that accompanies the lamb that is sacrificed with the omer is double the normal amount (Leviticus 23:13). Normally, there is one-tenth for a lamb, but this lamb is accompanied by two-tenths of grain. Nevertheless, the drink-offerings, meaning the wine and oil, were the same, three logs of oil and three logs of wine, the same as they always are for a lamb.     

