Menahot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
These require waving but not bringing near: 
The log of oil of the leper and his guilt-offering, 
The first fruits, according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov, 
The innards of an individual’s shelamim and its breast and thigh, whether they are the offerings of men or of women, by Israelites but not by others;  
The two loaves and the two lambs of Shavuot. 
How does he perform [the waving]? He places the two loaves upon the two lambs and puts his two hands beneath them and waves them forward and backward and upward and downward, for it is written, “which is waved and which is lifted up” (Exodus 29:27).  
The waving was performed on the east side [of the altar] and the bringing near on the west side. 
The ceremony of waving comes before that of bringing near.   
The minhah of the omer and the minhah of jealousy require bringing near and waving. 
The showbread and the minhah with the libations require neither bringing near nor waving.

Explanation
Section one: The mishnah now lists the minhahs that require waving but not bringing near. I will give references to these and brief explanations.
The log of oil of the leper and his guilt-offering: Leviticus 14:12 states, “The priest shall take one of the male lambs and offer it with the log of oil as an asham, and he shall wave them as a wave offering before the Lord.  
The first fruits, according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov: see Bikkurim 3:6.  
The innards of an individual’s shelamim and its breast and thigh, whether they are the offerings of men or of women, by Israelites but not by others: The innards of the shelamim are burned on the altar and the breast and thigh are given to a priest. That they need to be waved is stated in Leviticus 7:30 and 10:15. These parts are waved whether the shelamim is brought by a man or a woman, but only if the man or woman is Jewish. A Gentile can bring a shelamim but it is not waved. 
The two loaves and the two lambs of Shavuot: see Leviticus 23:20.
Section two: In describing how an offering is waved, the Torah states that it was waved and lifted up” which seems to be repetitive. The rabbis interpret “waving” as moving it forward and backward and “lifting up” to mean moving it upward and downward.
Section three: The two ceremonies described in these sections were performed on opposite sides of the altar. 
Section four: If the minhah is one that requires both waving and bringing near (these minhahs are listed in the next section) then first the minhah is waved and then it is brought near. This order is implied in Numbers 5:25, concerning the minhah of jealousy (brought by the suspected adulteress), “The priest shall take from the woman’s hand the minhah of jealousy, and wave the minhah before the Lord, and then bring it to the altar.” 
Section five: The two minhahs that require both waving and bringing near are the minhah of jealousy (see above) and the minhah of the omer, which is brought on the 16th of Nisan.
Section six: The showbread and the minhah brought with libations do not require either waving or bringing near. 
 
   



