Menahot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with two other types of minhah offerings that are similar in amount to the todah: the “basket of matzot” brought on the day that the priests were first consecrated to serve in the Tabernacle (Leviticus 8:26) and the “basket of matzot” brought by the Nazirite (Numbers 6:15).

Mishnah Two
The consecration [minhah] consisted of matzah like the todah: cakes, wafers, and soaked cakes. 
The nazirite minhah consisted of two thirds of the matzah of the todah: cakes and wafers, but not soaked cakes.
Thus there were ten kavs by Jerusalem measure, which are six tenths and something over. 
From each kind [the priest] took one tenth part as terumah, as it is said, “Out of this he shall offer one of each kind as a gift to the Lord” (Leviticus 7:14):  
“One:” that he may not take what is broken. 
“Out of each offering:” that each kind of offering shall be equal, [and] that he must not take [the terumah] from the one kind of offering on behalf of another.  
“It shall go to the priest who dashes the blood of the shelamim:” and the rest was consumed by the owner.

Explanation
Section one: The minhah offered at the consecration of the priests was the same as the matzot of the todah (see yesterday’s mishnah).
Section two: The minhah of the nazirite’s offering consisted of only cakes and wafers. Unlike the todah and the consecration minhah, there were no soaked cakes.
Section three: Since for the nazirite offering there are only two kinds of matzot and not three, there are only ten kavs needed and not the fifteen for the todah (as we saw in yesterday’s mishnah). Each type of matzah is three and 1/3 tenths of an ephah, so the two types of matzah are 6 and 2/3 tenths of an ephah. 
Section four: From each type of matzah in the todah and nazirite minhah, the priest takes one tenth as his terumah, his part. This is explicit in Leviticus 7:14 which states that the priest gets one part of each kind, meaning one of the ten cakes, one of the ten wafers and for the todah, one of the ten soaked cakes. 
Section five: The mishnah now contains a brief midrash of this verse. The word “one” means that the matzah that he removes should be whole and not broken.
Section six: “Out of each offering” means that the amount of matzot of each type must be equal—ten of each. Furthermore, the priest should not take two of one type and none of another—rather he must take one of each type.
Section seven: Besides the one matzah taken by the priest, the rest of the matzot go to the owner who brings the todah or the nazirite.  


