Menahot, Chapter Seven, Mishnah One

Introduction
This chapter deals with the rules regarding the loaves that accompany the thanksgiving offering, the “todah” (see Leviticus 7:12).

Mishnah One
The todah required five Jerusalem seahs [of flour], which are six wilderness seahs;   
This is the equivalent to two ephahs, for an ephah is three seahs, or to twenty tenths [of an ephah], ten for the leavened cakes and ten for the matzot.  
“Ten for the leavened cakes”—one tenth for each cake; 
“And ten for the matzot” –there were three kinds of matzot: loaves, wafers, and soaked cakes, thus there were three and a third tenths of flour for each kind, three cakes to every tenth. 
By Jerusalem measure they were thirty kavs, fifteen for the leavened cakes and fifteen for the matzot. 
“Fifteen for the leavened cakes”, one kav and a half for each cake. 
“And fifteen for the matzot”— there were three kinds of matzot: loaves, wafers, and soaked cakes, thus there were five kavs for each kind, two cakes to every kav.

Explanation
Section one: The amount of flour required for these loaves was five seahs measured with the Jerusalem measure of the seah, which is equivalent to six seahs as they were measured in the wilderness. What this means is that in Jerusalem the measures were 1/6 larger than they were in the wilderness. 
Section two: Six wilderness seahs are equivalent to two ephahs, which can be divided up into twenty tenths of an ephah. This comes out to twenty loaves each 1/10 of an ephah. Ten of these were leavened (chametz, see Leviticus 7:13) and ten were matzot (Leviticus 7:12).
Section three: Each leavened cake was 1/10 of an ephah (aren’t you grateful for simple math?).
Section four: Leviticus 7:12 lists three kinds of matzot: “unleavened cakes with oil mixed in, unleavened flours with oil, and cakes of choice flour with oil mixed in.” So if there were ten of each kind, each would have been 1/3 of a tenth of an ephah. 
Section five: The mishnah now provides the amounts according to the Jerusalem measure. In Jerusalem they didn’t count according to ephah and tenths of an ephah but rather according to kavs. A seah is six kav so five seahs are 30 kav. 
Section six: According to this account, there were fifteen kav for the leavened cakes, 1 ½ kav per cake.
Section seven: When you do the account for the matzot, each kind gets five kav, divided by ten cakes, adds up to ½ a kav per cake. 
