Menahot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
All menahot must be rubbed three hundred times and beaten five hundred times. 
The rubbing and the beating apply is performed with the grains of wheat.  
Rabbi Yose says: also to the dough.  
All menahot consist of ten cakes each, except the showbread and the griddle-cakes of the high priest, which consist of twelve cakes each, the words of Rabbi Judah. 
But Rabbi Meir says: they all consist of twelve cakes each, except the loaves of the todah and of the nazirite-offering, which consist of ten cakes each.

Explanation
Section one: The grains of wheat that will be used for the minhah offering must be rubbed three hundred times and then beaten five hundred times. This process is done in order to remove the husks before the grain is ground into flour.
Section two: The first opinion holds that the rubbing and beating is performed with the grain, as explained above. Rabbi Yose holds that the same is done with the dough. This is to further refine and perfect the quality of the minhah. According to a different version of the mishnah, Rabbi Yose says that it only applies to the dough and not to the grain. 
Section three: Whether the menahot consist of loaves or wafers, they make ten cakes. According to Rabbi Judah all menahot are compared with the minhah that accompanies the todah - just as it has ten loaves, so too do all menahot.  There are two exceptions, the showbread (see Leviticus 24:5) and the daily minhah of griddle-cakes offered by the high priest (Leviticus 6:13-15). With regard to the latter, the verse does not state that 12 cakes are offered. Rather, the rabbis derive this number midrashically by comparing it with the showbread. 
Section four: Rabbi Meir says that all menahot consist of twelve-cakes, for they derive the number of cakes from the showbread. The two exceptions are the todah (thanks-giving offering) and the minhah that accompanies the nazirite offering. We shall learn more about these two menahot in chapter seven.  


