Menahot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Three

Mishnah Three
For what purpose did the quarter-log serve? 
[To measure] a quarter-log of water for the one with skin disease and a quarter-log of oil for the Nazirite.   
For what purpose did the half-log serve? 
[To measure] a half-log of water for the sotah and a half-log of oil for the todah. 
With the log one measured [the oil] for all the menahot. 
Even a minhah of sixty tenths required sixty logs [of oil].  
Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: even a minhah of sixty tenths required only one log [of oil], for it is written, “For a minhah, and for a log of oil” (Leviticus 14:21).   
Six [logs] were required for a bull, four for a ram, and three for a lamb; 
Three logs and a half for the menorah, a half-log for each lamp.

Explanation
Section one: The quarter-log was used to measure the water used in the purification of the person with skin disease (the metzora, see Leviticus 14:5) and the quarter-log of oil used in preparing the cakes and wafers for the nazirite (see above mishnah 7:2).
Section two: The half-log was used to measure the water for the Sotah, which she will later drink (see Numbers 5:17). It was also the measure used to prepare the cakes that accompany the todah offering (see above mishnah 7:1).
Section three: The log was used to measure the oil for all of the menahot, which used a log of oil to accompany each tenth of grain. According to the first opinion, if a minhah has sixty-tenths of grain, it will require sixty logs of oil, one log for each tenth.
Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says that even if a minhah contains sixty-tenths of grain, it only requires one log of oil. He derives this midrashically from a verse concerning the minhah of a person with skin disease.
Section four: Six logs are ½ of a hin, which we learned in yesterday’s mishnah are the amount of oil for a bull, four are a 1/3 of a hin and three are ¼ of a hin, as we leaned in yesterday’s mishnah. 
Section five: The menorah required a total of 3.5 logs, half of a log for each lamp.
(I might suggest that if you enjoyed this mishnah, you could make a song out of it for Pesah. Who knows a quarter-log? I know a quarter-log!).  

