Menahot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Five

Mishnah Five
All the measures in the Temple were heaped except [that used for] the high priest's [minhah] which included in itself the heaped amount.  
The overflow of the liquid-measures was holy, but the overflow of the dry-measures was not holy.  
Rabbi Akiva says: the liquid-measuring vessels were holy, therefore their overflow was holy too; the dry-measuring vessels were not holy, therefore their overflow was not holy.  
Rabbi Yose says: it is not for that reason, but because liquids are stirred up and dry-stuffs are not.

Explanation
Section one: The measuring vessels used in the Temple were filled up until they were overflowing. The one exception was the measuring vessel used for the high priest’s griddle cakes, which was large enough to contain without overflowing the amount that it would have contained had it actually been overflowing. We should note that this matches Rabbi Meir’s opinion in mishnah one—there were three dry-measuring vessels in the Temple, one that contained a tenth and one that contained a tenth and its overflow.
Section two: When vessels are overflowing, the obvious question then becomes, what do we do with the overflow? The mishnah states that the overflow of liquid, meaning wine and oil, is holy and must be treated as such, whereas the overflow of the dry-measures, the grain, is not holy.
Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yose disagree as to why the liquid is holy and the grain is not. Rabbi Akiva says that the liquid-measuring vessels were anointed with anointing oil, and thereby became holy. This made anything that was inside them holy as well. The dry-measuring vessels were not anointed, and therefore their overflow was not holy.
Rabbi Yose agrees with the halakhah but disagrees with Rabbi Akiva’s reasoning. The liquid overflow is holy because the liquid that overflows was actually at one point in the vessel. There are various different versions of the Hebrew word that I have translated as “stirred up” but they all imply the same thing—since the oil or wine was actually in the vessel, it is sanctified. In contrast, the dry overflow was never in the vessel, just on top of it. Therefore it is not holy.    

