Mishnah Menachot
מנחות
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

All meal offerings that were scooped without intent are accepted, but they do not fulfill the obligation for the owners[those who brought the offering], except for the meal offering of a sinner or the grain offering brought out of jealousy [as part of the sotah ritual](these are rendered unfit). The grain offerings of a sinner and of jealousy that were scooped without intent, or that were put into a vessel, or that were brought[to the altar], or were burned without intent, or one[was brought] with intent and the other without intent, or one without and one with intent, they are invalid. What is this case of one with and one without intent? With the intent of the meal offering of the sinner and with the intent of the voluntary meal offering. Or one without and one with intent? With the intent of a voluntary meal offering  and with the intent of a meal offering of a sinner.
Both the meal offering of a sinner and all the meal offerings that were scooped by a non-priest, or by a grieving priest [pre-burial], or someone who immersed on that day [but only becomes pure at nightfall], or a priest not wearing the priestly garb, or one who has not yet brought required sacrifices, or who has not washed his hands and feet[before his service], or an uncircumcised person, or an impure person, or one seated, or standing on a vessel, or on an animal, or on another person's legs[while performing his worship as those listed above become a barrier between the priest and the sacrifice], is invalid. If he scooped it with his left hand, it is invalid. Ben Betera says: he should return it and scoop again with his right. If he scooped it, and a stone or a chunk of salt or a remnant of frankincense came with it in his hand, it is invalid, because they said: one who scoops with extra or lacking, it is invalid. What is this extra? If he scooped it wide-handed. And less? If he scooped it with his fingertips. How should he do it? Extend his fingers on his palm[and bring the flour with his three middle fingers into his palm].
If he used too much oil or too little  oil or too little  frankincense, it is invalid[all these offerings require a particular mixture of flour and the appropriate substance]. One who takes a fistful from the grain offering [intending]:  To eat the remainder outside [the Temple] or an olive’s worth outside; Or to burn the fistful or an olive’s worth of the fistful outside; or  to burn its frankincense outside, it is invalid, but it does not involve excommunication. [One who takes a fistful from the grain offering intending]:  To eat the remainder the next day or an olive’s worth the next day; or  to burn the fistful the next day or an olive’s worth of the fistful the next day; or to burn its frankincense the next day,  It is rejected as piggul(a sacrifice rejectable because of improper intention), and they would be liable for excommunication.   This is the general rule: anyone who removes the fistful, or puts it into a vessel, or carries it to the altar, or burns it, [intending] to eat the amount of that which is normally eaten or to burn [on the altar] as much as that which is normally burned outside its prescribed place[the Temple courtyard], [the minhah] is invalid, but it does not result in excommunication;  [Intending to eat or burn] after its designated time, it is rejected as piggul and it results in excommunication, provided that the permitter[the fistful of flour] is offered as required. How is "the permitter offered as required"?  If one took out the fistful in silence[without intention of impropriety], and put it in a vessel and carried it, and burned it, [intending to eat it] after its designated time;  Or if one took out the fistful [intending to eat the meal-offering] after its designated time, and put it in a vessel, and carried it and burned it in silence[without improper intention], or if one took out the fistful and put it in a vessel, carried it out, and burned it [intending to eat the meal-offering] after its designated time. That is offering the permitted as is required.  
How is the "not offering the permitted as is required by law" done?  If one took out the fistful [intending to eat it] outside the designated place, [and] put it in a vessel, carried it to the altar, and burned [with the intention of eating it] after its designated time;  Or if one took out the fistful [intending to eat it] after its designated time, [and] put it in a vessel, carried it to the altar, and burned it [intending to eat it] outside its designated place, or if one took out the fistful, put it in vessel, carried it to the altar, and burned [intending to eat it] outside its designated time. If one took out the fistful of a sinner’s meal offering or the meal offering of jealousy for the sake of something else, and put it in a vessel, carried it to the altar, and burned it [intending to eat them] after their designated time;  Or if one took out the fistful [from them, intending to eat] after their designated time, [and] put it in a vessel, carried it to the altar, and burned for the sake of something else, or if one took out the fistful, put it in vessel, carried it to the altar, and burned for the sake of something else;  this is not offering the permitter(the fistful) as it's intended. [If one intended] to eat as much as an olive outside its designated place [and] as much as an olive on the next day, [or] as much as an olive on the next day [and] as much as an olive outside its designated place;    Half as much as an olive outside its designated place [and] half as much as an olive on the next day;  Half as much as an olive on the next day [and] half as much as an olive outside its designated place,  [The sacrifice] is unfit, and does not require excommunication.    Rabbi Judah said: this is the general rule: where the [improper] intention of time precedes the [improper] intention of place, [the sacrifice] is rejected due to piggul, and results in excommunication; but if the [improper] intention of place precedes the [improper] intention of time, it is invalid and does not result in excommunication.   But the sages say: in both cases [the sacrifice] is invalid and does not result in excommunication.  [If one intends] to eat half as much as an olive [after its intended time or outside its intended place] [and] to burn half as much as an olive [similarly] it[the mincha] is valid, for eating and burning do not combine[to equal an olive's worth which would have rendered it unfit.]  

Chapter 2

If he took out the handful [intending] to eat the remainder or to burn the handful the next day, in this case Rabbi Yose agrees that the offering is rejected due to piggul and he is obligated for extirpation.  
[If he intended] to burn its frankincense the next day: 
Rabbi Yose says: it is invalid but he is not liable for extirpation.
But the sages say: it is rejected due to piggul and he is liable for extirpation. 
They said to him: how does this differ from an animal-offering?  
He said to them: with the animal-offering the blood, the flesh and the sacrificial portions are all one; but the frankincense is not part of the grain offering.

If he slaughtered the two lambs [intending] to eat one of the [two] loaves the next day, or if he burned the two dishes [of the frankincense intending] to eat one of the [two] rows of the showbread the next day:
Rabbi Yose says: that loaf or that row about which he expressed the intention is rejected due to piggul and he is liable for extirpation for it, while the other is invalid but he is not liable for extirpation for it. 
But the sages say, both are rejected due to piggul and he is liable for extirpation for both of them.
If one of the [two] loaves or one of the [two] rows [of the shewbread] became unclean: 
Rabbi Judah says: both must be taken out to the place of burning, for the offering of the congregation may not be divided.   
But the sages say, the unclean [is treated] as unclean, but the clean may be eaten.

The thanksgiving offering can render the bread rejected due to piggul but the bread does not render the thanksgiving offering rejected due to piggul. 
How so? If he slaughtered the thanksgiving offering intending to eat part of it on the next day, both it and the bread are rejected due to piggul; if he intended to eat part of the bread the next day, the bread is rejected due to piggul but the thanksgiving offering is not rejected due to piggul.
2)	The lambs can render the bread rejected due to piggul but the bread cannot render the lambs rejected due to piggul. 
a)	How so? If he slaughtered the lambs intending to eat part of them the next day, both they and the bread are rejected due to piggul; if he intended to eat part of the bread the next day, the bread is rejected due to piggul but the lambs are not.

The animal-offering can render the libations rejected due to piggul after they have been sanctified in the vessel, the words of Rabbi Meir. 
But the libations cannot render the animal-offering rejected due to piggul. 
One who slaughters an animal-offering intending to eat part of it on the next day, both it and the libations are rejected due to piggul; if he intended to offer the libations the next day, the libations are rejected due to piggul but the animal-offering is not.

If he had an intention which causes something to be rejected because of piggul [with regard to the remainder of the grain-offering] during the [burning of the] handful and not during the [burning of the] frankincense, or during the [burning of the] frankincense and not during the [burning of the] incense:
Rabbi Meir says: it is rejected due to piggul and he is liable for extirpation for it; 
But the sages say: there is no extirpation unless he had an intention which causes something to be rejected due to piggul during the service of the whole of the thing that causes it to be permitted.  
The sages agree with Rabbi Meir with regard to a sinner’s grain offering or a grain offering of jealousy, that if he had an intention which renders something rejected due to piggul during the [burning of the] handful, [the remainder] is rejected due to piggul and he is liable for extirpation for it, since the handful is the entire thing that causes it to be permitted. 
If he slaughtered one of the lambs intending to eat the two loaves the next day, or if he burned one of the dishes of frankincense intending to eat the two rows [of the shewbread] on the next day: 
Rabbi Meir says: it is rejected due to piggul and he is liable for extirpation for it; 
But the sages say: it is not rejected due to piggul, unless he had an intention that renders something rejected due to piggul during the service of the whole of the thing that causes it to be permitted. 
If he slaughtered one of the lambs intending to eat part of it the next day, that [lamb] is rejected due to piggul but the other [lamb] is valid.
If he intended to eat the other [lamb] the next day, both are valid.


Chapter 3

If he took the fistful from the grain offering intending to eat [outside its proper place or after its proper time] a thing that it is not usual to eat or to burn [outside its proper place or after its proper time] a thing that it is not usual to burn, the offering is valid.
But Rabbi Eliezer says it is invalid. 
If he intended to eat less than an olive's worth of a thing that it is usual to eat, or to burn less than an olive's worth of a thing that it is usual to burn, the offering is valid. 
If he intended to eat a half of an olive's worth and to burn a half of an olive’s worth, the offering is valid, for eating and burning are not reckoned together.

If he did not pour in [the oil], or if he did not mix it, or if he did not break up [the grain offering] into pieces, or if he did not salt it, or wave it, or if he did not draw it near, or if he broke it up into large pieces, or if he did not anoint it [with oil], it is valid.
If the handful of one grain offering was mixed with the handful of another, or with a priest’s grain offering, or with the grain offering of the anointed [high] priest, or with the grain offering offered with the libations, it is valid.  
Rabbi Judah says: if [it was mixed] with the grain offering of the anointed [high] priest or with the grain offering offered with libations, it is invalid, for since the consistency of the one is thick and the consistency of the other is thin, each absorbs from the other.  

Two grain offerings from which the fistfuls had not yet been taken out were mixed together:
If it is still possible to take the fistful from each separately, they are valid; 
If not, they are invalid. 
If the fistful [of a grain offering] was mixed with a grain offering from which the fistful had not yet been taken, he must not burn it. 
If he did burn it, then the grain offering from which the fistful had been taken fulfills the owner's obligation while the other from which the fistful had not been taken does not fulfill the owner's obligation. 
If the fistful was mixed with the remainder of the grain offering or with the remainder of another grain offering, it must not be burned; 
If he did burn it does fulfill the owner's obligation.
If the fistful had become unclean and yet he offered it, the head plate renders it acceptable,  
But if it went out [of the Temple Court] and  afterwards he offered it, the headplate does not render it acceptable.
For the headplate renders acceptable only an offering which was unclean but not that which was taken out.

If the remainder of the grain offering became unclean or was burnt or lost: 
According to the rule of Rabbi Eliezer it is valid. 
But according to the rule of Rabbi Joshua it is invalid.
If [he did] not [put the fistful] into a ministering vessel it is invalid; 
But Rabbi Shimon declares it valid. 
If he burnt the handful twice, it is valid.

Regarding the fistful: the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole.  
Regarding the tenth [of flour for the grain offering] the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole. 
Regarding the wine [libation which accompanies the grain offering] the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole. 
Regarding the oil [which is mixed in with the grain offering] the [absence of the] smallest part invalidates the whole. 
Regarding the flour and the oil, the [absence of] one invalidates the other. 
Regarding the fistful and the frankincense, the [absence of] one invalidates the other.

Regarding the two goats of Yom Hakippurim, the [absence of] one invalidates the other. 
Regarding the two lambs of Atzeret, the [absence of] one invalidates the other. 
Regarding the two loaves [that accompany the lambs] the [absence of] one invalidates the other. 
Regarding the two rows [of the showbread] the [absence of] one invalidates the other.
Regarding the two dishes [of frankincense] the [absence of] one invalidates the other.
Regarding the rows and the dishes the [absence of] one invalidates the other.
Regarding the: 
two kinds [of cakes] used in the offering of the nazirite, 
the three kinds used for the red cow, 
the four kinds [of cakes] used in the thanksgiving offering, 
the four kinds [of species] used for the lulav,
and the four kinds used for the [purification of the] leper, 
the [absence of] one invalidates the others. 
Regarding the seven sprinklings [of the blood] of the red cow the [absence of] one invalidates the others. 
Regarding the seven sprinklings between the poles of the ark, and of those toward the curtain and upon the golden altar, the [absence of] one invalidates the others.

Regarding the seven branches of the menorah, the [absence of] one invalidates the others. 
Regarding the seven lamps on it, the [absence of] one invalidates the others. 
Regarding the two portions of Scripture in the mezuzah, the [absence of] one invalidates the other; and even one letter invalidates the whole. 
Regarding the four portions of Scripture in tefillin, the [absence of] one invalidates the others; even one letter can invalidate the whole. 
Regarding the four fringes, the [absence of] one invalidates the others, since the four together are one commandment.  
Rabbi Ishmael says: the four are four separate commandments.


Chapter 4

The [absence of the] blue [in the fringes] does not invalidate the white, neither does the [absence of the] white invalidate the blue.
The [absence of the] hand-tefillin does not invalidate the head-tefillin, neither does the [absence of the] head-tefillin invalidate the hand-tefillin. 
The [absence of the] fine flour and the oil does not invalidate the wine, neither does the [absence of the] wine invalidate them. 
The [absence of one of the] sprinklings [of the blood] on the outer altar does not invalidate the rest.

The bulls and the rams and the sheep do not hinder one another. R. Simon says, if they had many bulls but they did not possess [enough to constitute] a drink-offering, let them bring one bull with its drink-offering and should not offer them all without drink-offerings.
The bull and the rams and the lambs and the sheep do not hinder the bread-offering, nor the bread-offering hinder [them]. The bread-offering can hinder the lambs, but the lambs cannot hinder the Bread-offering. R. Akiva, R. Simon b Nanos said: Not so, rather the lambs can hinder the bread-offering, but the bread-offering cannot hinder the lambs; because we find that when Israel was in the wilderness forty years, they offered lambs without the bread-offering, so now too they may offer the lambs without the bread-offering. R. Simon said: Halacha is according to the words of Ben Nanos, but the grounds isn't according to his words; that all the [offerings] were offered in wilderness. And all the [offerings] in the Teaching of the Priests, were not offered in the wilderness. But when they came to the land, they offered both kinds. But then why can I say they can offer the lambs without the bread-offering? Because the lambs that allows one's offering permissible with the bread-offering; But if the bread-offering is brought without the lambs, it is not permissible.
The [absence of the] daily offerings (tamidin) does not invalidate the additional offerings (musafim), neither does [the absence of] the additional offerings invalidate the daily offerings, neither does the absence of [one of the] additional offerings invalidate the other additional offerings. 
Even though they did not offer the [tamid] lamb in the morning they must offer [the lamb] towards evening.    
Rabbi Shimon said: When is this so? Only when they had acted under duress or in error, but if they acted deliberately and did not offer the lamb in the morning they may not offer [the lamb] towards evening. 
If they did not burn the incense in the morning they burn it towards evening.  
Rabbi Shimon said: all of it was burned towards evening.
For they dedicate the golden altar only by the incense of spices.
And the altar for the whole burnt offering by the daily offering of the morning, 
And the table only by the showbread on Shabbat, 
And the menorah only by [the kindling of] seven lamps towards evening.

The high priest’s griddle-cakes cannot be brought in [two separate] halves. Rather he must bring a whole tenth and then divide it, offering a half in the morning and a half towards evening. 
If a [high] priest offered half in the morning and then died and they appointed another priest in his place, [the successor] may not bring a half-tenth from his house, neither [may he use] the remaining half-tenth of the first [high priest]. Rather he must bring a whole tenth and divide it, and offer one half and leaving the other half goes to waste. 
It turns out that two halves are offered and two halves go to waste. 
If they did not appoint another priest in his place, from whose expense was it offered?  
Rabbi Shimon says, from the community; 
But Rabbi Judah says: from his heirs, 
And a whole [tenth] was offered. 


Chapter 5

All grain offerings must be offered unleavened, with the exception of the leavened cakes of the thanksgiving offering and the two loaves [of Shavuot] which are offered leavened.  
Rabbi Meir says: he takes the leaven from [the grain offerings] themselves and with this they are leavened.    
Rabbi Judah says: that is not the best way, rather [first of all] he brings leaven and puts into the measuring vessel and then he fills the measuring vessel up [with flour]. 
But they said to him: even so [it is not satisfactory], for it would be sometimes too little and sometimes too much.  

All grain offerings must be kneaded with lukewarm water.
He must be guard them lest they become leavened. 
If  the remainder became leavened he has transgressed a negative commandment, for it is written, “No grain offering which you shall bring to the Lord shall be made leavened” (Leviticus 2:11).    
One is liable for the kneading, and for rolling and for baking.

Some [grain offerings] require oil and frankincense, some require oil but not frankincense, some frankincense but not oil, and some neither oil nor frankincense. 
These require oil and frankincense: the grain offering of fine flour, that prepared on a griddle, that prepared in a pan, the cakes and the wafers, the grain offering of the priests, the grain offering of the anointed high priest, the grain offering of a non-Jew, the grain offering of women, and the grain offering of the omer (barley offering).  
The grain offering offered with the drink-offerings requires oil but not frankincense. 
The showbread requires frankincense but not oil. 
The two loaves, the sinner's grain offering and the grain offering of jealousy require neither oil nor frankincense.

And one is liable for the oil on its own and for the frankincense on its own.  
If he put in oil, he has invalidated it, but if frankincense, he can remove it. 
If he put oil on the remainder, he has not transgressed a negative commandment. 
If he put one vessel above the other vessel, he has not rendered it invalid.

Some [grain offerings] require bringing near but not waving, some require waving but not bringing near, some require bringing near and also waving, and some require neither bringing near nor waving. 
These require bringing near but not waving: the grain offering of fine flour, that prepared on a griddle, that prepared in a pan, the cakes and the wafers, the grain offering of the priests, the grain offering of the anointed high priest, the grain offering of a gentile, the grain offering of women, and the grain offering of the barley offering (omer).
Rabbi Shimon says: the grain offering of the priests and the grain offering of the anointed high priest do not require bringing near, since no fistful is taken out of them. And in any case where no fistful is taken out bringing near is not necessary.

These require waving but not bringing near: 
The log of oil of the leper and his guilt-offering, 
The first fruits, according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov, 
The innards of an individual’s wellbeing offering and its breast and thigh, whether they are the offerings of men or of women, by Israelites but not by others;  
The two loaves and the two lambs of Atzeret (Shavuot). 
How does he perform [the waving]? He places the two loaves upon the two lambs and puts his two hands beneath them and waves them forward and backward and upward and downward, for it is written, “which is waved and which is lifted up” (Exodus 29:27).  
The waving was performed on the east side [of the altar] and the bringing near on the west side. 
The ceremony of waving comes before that of bringing near.   
The grain offering of the barley offering (omer) and the grain offering of jealousy require bringing near and waving. 
The showbread and the grain offering brought with the libations require neither bringing near nor waving.

Rabbi Shimon says, there are three kinds [of sacrifices] which require three commandments; two [of the three] apply to each kind, but none of them require a third. 
And these are they: the wellbeing offering of the individual, the wellbeing offering of the community and the guilt offering of the leper. 
The wellbeing offering of the individual requires the laying on of hands for the living animal and waving after it is slaughtered, but it does not require waving while alive. 
The wellbeing offering of the community requires waving while alive and also after it is slaughtered, but it does not require the laying on of hands. 
The guilt offering of the leper requires the laying on of hands and also waving while alive, but it does not require waving after it is slaughtered.

One who says, “I take upon myself [to offer a grain offering] prepared on a griddle,” he must not bring one prepared in a pan; 
If [he says, I take upon myself to offer a grain offering prepared] in a pan,” he must not bring one prepared on a griddle. 
What is the difference between a griddle [mahabat] and a pan [marheshet]?  The pan has a lid to it, but the griddle has no lid, the words of Rabbi Yose the Galilean.  
Rabbi Hanina ben Gamaliel says: a pan is deep and what is prepared is spongy; a griddle is flat and what is prepared on it is hard.

[If one said,] “I take upon myself [to offer a grain offering baked] in an oven,” he must not bring what is baked in a stove or on tiles or in the cauldrons of the Arabs.    
Rabbi Judah says: he may bring what is baked in a stove. 
[If he said,] “I take upon myself [to offer] a baked grain offering,” he may not bring half in loaves and half in wafers.    
Rabbi Shimon permits it for it is one kind of offering.


Chapter 6

These flour offerings have K'emitza (a 3-fingers full of flour) taken from it and the remainder goes to the priests.  A fine flour offering, the frying pan flour offering, the deep-fried flour offering, loaves, wafers, the flour offering of non-jews, the flour offering of women, the flour offering of the omer, the flour offering of a sinner, and the flour offering of jealousy [sotah].  Rabbi Shimon says, the sinners flour offering of a priest has its Kometz removed and is burned separately from the remainder. 
The grain offering of the priests and the grain offering of the anointed high priest, and the grain offering that is offered with the libations are [wholly] for the altar and the priests have no share in them. With these the altar has greater power than the priests. 
The two loaves and the showbread are eaten by the priests and the altar has no share in them; with these the priests have greater power than the altar.

All grain offerings that are prepared in a vessel require three applications of oil: pouring, mixing and putting oil in the vessel, before they are made.   
The [baked] loaves were mixed [with oil], the words of Rabbi [Judah Hanasi]. 
But the sages say: the fine flour [was mixed with oil]. 
The loaves require mixing and the wafers anointing. 
How did he anoint them? Like a “chi.”   
And the rest of the oil was eaten by the priests.

All grain offerings prepared in a vessel must be broken into pieces.
The grain offering of an Israelite was folded into two and the two were folded into four, and he severed [it at each bend]. 
The grain offering of priests was folded into two and the two were folded into four, but he does not sever.
The grain offering of the anointed high priest was not folded.  
Rabbi Shimon says: neither the grain offering of the priests nor the grain offering of the anointed high priest was broken in pieces, since the fistful was not taken from them, and whenever the fistful is not taken [from a grain offering] it is not to be broken in pieces. 
And they were all the size of an olive.

All grain offerings must be rubbed three hundred times and beaten five hundred times. 
The rubbing and the beating is performed with the grains of wheat.  
Rabbi Yose says: also to the dough.  
All grain offerings consist of ten cakes, except the showbread and the griddle-cakes of the high priest, which consist of twelve cakes , the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Meir says: they all consist of twelve cakes, except the loaves of the thanksgiving offering and of the nazirite-offering, which consist of ten cakes.

The omer consisted of one tenth [of an ephah of flour] taken from three se'ahs.
The two loaves--two tenths taken from three se'ahs.
And the showbread--twenty-four tenths taken from twenty-four se'ahs.

The omer was sifted in thirteen sieves, the two loaves [of shavuot] in twelve and the [panim]-bread in eleven.  Rabbi Shimon said there was no fixed value rather flour that was sifted as much as necessary was brought as it says (Leviticus 24) "You shall take flour and bake it" until it has been sifted as much as needed. 

Chapter 7

The thanksgiving offering was brought from five se'ah of flour of the Jerusalem measure, which is six se'ah of desert measure.  It was to Eifahs, which is three se'ah and twenty Issaron, ten of which were used for leavened bread and ten were used for unleavened bread.  Ten for the leavened meant that each loaf had a whole issaron [of flour].  The ten for the unleavened bread which came in three varieties, loaves, wafers and scalded. Therefore each variety got three and a third issaron meaning there were three loaves for every issaron.  In the Jerusalem measures it was thirty kav, fifteen for the leavened and fifteen for the unleavened.  For the fifteen in  the leavened each loaf had one and a half kavs.  For the fifteen in the unleavened bread which came in three varieties, loaves, wafers and scalded, each variety got five kav meaning there were two loaves for every kav.
[The meal-offering at] the dedication [of the temple] consisted of [various kinds of] unleavened breads, like those [brought as part] of the thanksgiving-offering; [namely] loaves, wafers, and oily bread.   The Nazirite meal-offering consisted of two thirds of the unleavened breads [brought as part] of the thanksgiving –offering; namely loaves and wafers. But not oily bread; thus there were ten kabs by Jerusalem measure, which is a little over six tenths.   From each one [of the unleavened breads brought with the Thanksgiving offering the priest] would take one tenth as terumah (an offering for the officiating priest), as it states (Leviticus 7:14) "And he shall bring from it one out of each offering, as a separation for the Lord;"  [The word] "One" [tenth, indicates a whole loaf so] that one may not take a slice [or piece of bread as terumah for the priest].  [The phrase] "From each one" [indicates] that all the offerings should be equal [in measure] and that one may not take [the officiating priests share] out of one offering on behalf of another [that has less].  [The terumah is given] to the officiating priest who sprinkles the blood of the peace-offering. The rest [of the sacrifice] is eaten by the owner.  
If one slaughtered the thanksgiving-offering inside [beyond the temple Court] but its bread was [baked] outside the [Pagi] wall, the Bread was not consecrated.If he slaughtered [the thanksgiving-offering] before [the loaves] had formed a crust in the oven, or even if all [the loaves] except one had formed a crust, the bread was not consecrated. If he slaughtered  [the thanksgiving-offering] and it was found to be a trefah (prohibited to be eaten due to a fatal injury or disease) the bread is not hallowed.If he slaughtered [the thanksgiving-offering] and it was found to have a blemish [that disqualifies it as an offering, this is subject to a dispute] Rabbi Eliezer states; "[the bread was] consecrated". The Sages state: " [The bread was] not consecrated." If one slaughtered [the animal] but not for the sake of [the thanksgiving-offering] and the same [law applies] if  he slaughtered the ram of the dedication ceremony or the two lambs of Shavuot for the sake of other [offerings, in all these cases] the bread was] not consecrated.
Libations that became sanctified in a vessel, and their corresponding] sacrifice was found invalid, if there is another sacrifice it should be brought with them, but if not, they must become invalid by being left overnight.  The child of a todah and its replacement and one who separates a todah and loses it and then separates another after it, [the secondary sacrifice] does not require bread as it says (Leviticus 7) "And he should bring with the todah sacrifice".  Only the todah needs bread, and not its child, its exchange, or its replacement. 
One who says "I accept upon myself to bring a todah" must bring it and its bread from non-sacred money.  If he brought the todah with non-sacred money and the bread from ma'aser he must bring it and its bread from non-sacred money.  If he brought the todah from ma'aser and the bread from non-sacred money he can bring it.  If he brought both the bread and the sacrifice from ma'aser then he can bring it.  But he cant bring his offering from the wheat of ma'aser sheni, only from the money of ma'aser sheni. 
How do we know that one who says "I accept upon myself a todah" that it must be brought from non-sacred money?  As it says (Deuteronomy 16:2) "You shall slaughter the Passover offering to Hashem your god sheep and cattle".  But Passover offerings are only brought from sheep or goats, so why does it say "Sheep or cattle"? Rather it is to connect everything that comes from cattle or sheep to the Passover offering:  Just as the Passover offering which comes as an obligation can only be brought from non-sacred money so too anything which comes as an obligation can only be brought from non-sacred money.  Therefore one who says, "I accept upon myself a todah or a shlamim", since they are brought as an obligation, they are only brought from non-sacred money. Libations in any case can only be brought from non-sacred money.  

Chapter 8

All public and private offerings can be brought from within Israel or outside Israel, from that year or a previous year except for the omer and the two breads [of shavuot] which can only be brought from that years produce and from within the land of Israel.  And all of them should only be brought from the best.  What is the best? Michmas and Mizoniacha are the best lands for flour.  Second best for flour are Chafaraim in the valley.  All lands are really valid, but that is where they would bring them from. 
They may not bring [grain for grain offerings] from a manured field or from an irrigated field or from a field of trees.
But if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. 
How did he make it? He plows it in the first year and in the second year he sows it seventy days before Pesah, and it would produce a great quantity of fine flour. 
How would he test it? The temple-treasurer would put his hand into it; if some dust came up in [his hand] it was invalid, until he sifted it [more]. 
If it had become full of maggots, it is invalid.

Tekoa is “alpha” for its oil. 
Abba Shaul says: Second to it is Regev, on the other side of the Jordan. 
The [oil of the] whole land was valid, but they used to bring it only from these places. 
One may not bring it from a manured field nor from an irrigated field nor from [from olive-trees planted in a field] with seeds sown in between them, but if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. 
One may not bring anpakinon (from olives that were not fully ripe), and if one did bring it, it is invalid.   
One may not bring it from olive-berries which had been soaked in water or preserved or stewed; and if one did bring it, it is invalid.

There are three [crops of] olives and each gives three kinds of oil.  
The first crop of olives he picks the olives from the top of the tree; and he pounds them and puts them into the basket.
Rabbi Judah says: around the basket.   
This is the first. 
He then presses them with the beam 
Rabbi Judah says: with stones.   
This is the second. 
He goes back grinds them and presses them again.
This is the third . 
The first [oil] is fit for the candlestick and the others for grain offerings. 
The second olive crop is when he picks them at roof-level and he pounds them and puts them into the basket.
Rabbi Judah says: around the basket.   
This is the first. 
He then presses them with the beam 
Rabbi Judah says: with stones.   
This is the second. 
He goes back grinds them and presses them again.
This is the third . 
The first [oil] is fit for the candlestick and the others for grain offerings. 
The third olive crop is when he packs the last olives of the tree inside the house until they become overripe; he takes up and dries them on the roof and he pounds them and puts them into the basket.
Rabbi Judah says: around the basket.   
This is the first. 
He then presses them with the beam 
Rabbi Judah says: with stones.   
This is the second. 
He goes back grinds them and presses them again.
This is the third . 
The first [oil] is fit for the candlestick and the others for grain offerings. 

The first of the first, there is none better than it. 
The second of the first and the first of the second are equal. 
The third of the first, the second of the second and the first oil of the third are equal. 
The third of the second  and the second of the third are equal. 
The third of the third, there is none worse than it. 
It would have been logical that grain offerings should also require the purest olive oil: if the candlestick, whose [oil] is not for eating, requires pure olive oil, grain offerings, whose oil is for eating,  is it not logical that they should require pure olive oil!  Scripture says, “Pure olive oil of beaten olives for lighting” (Exodus 27:20), but not pure olive oil of beaten olives for grain offerings.

From where did they bring the wine?  
Keruhim and Attulim are alpha for wine. 
Second to them are Bet Rimmah and Bet Lavan on the mountain and Kefar Signa in the valley. 
[Wine of the] whole land was valid but they used to bring it only from these places. 
One may not bring it from a manured field or from an irrigated field or from [vines planted in a field] sown with seeds; but if one did bring it [from these] it was valid. 
One may not bring wine from sun-dried grapes, but if one did bring it, it was valid. 
One may not bring old wine, the words of Rabbi. 
But the sages validate it. 
One may not bring sweet wine or smoked wine or cooked wine, and if one did bring it, it was invalid. 
One may not bring wine from grapes hung[on reeds], but only from the vines growing close to the ground and from cultivated vineyards.

They would not put [the wine] in large casks but in small barrels.
And one did not fill the barrels to the edge so that its scent might spread.   
One may not take the wine at the edge of the barrel because of the scum, nor that at the bottom because of the lees. 
Rather, one should take it only from the third or the middle of the barrel.  
How did he test it?  The temple-treasurer used to sit with a reed in his hand; when it cast off the froth he would knock with his stick.   
Rabbi Yose bar Judah says: wine on which there is a scum is invalid, as it is said, “They shall be for you without blemish, and their grain offering,” and "They shall be for you without blemish, and their libations” (Numbers 28:19-20, 31).


Chapter 9

There were two measures in the Temple: the tenth and the half-tenth.    
Rabbi Meir says: the tenth, [another] tenth, and a half-tenth. 
For what purpose did the tenth measure serve? 
By it he would measure all the grain offerings. 
He would not measure with a three-tenths measure for a bull or with a two-tenths measure for a ram, rather, rather they would measure by tenths. 
For what purpose did the half-tenth measure serve? 
By it he would measure the griddlecakes of the high priest, half in the morning and the half towards evening.

There were seven measuring vessels for liquids in the Temple: the hin, the half-hin, the third-hin, the quarter-hin, the log, the half-log, and the quarter-log.  
Rabbi Eliezer bar Zadok says: there were markings in the hin measure: thus far for a bull, thus far for a ram, and thus far for a lamb.    
Rabbi Shimon says: there was no hin measure at all, for what purpose could the hin serve?  Rather there was an additional measure of one and a half logs by which he would measure [the oil] for the grain offering of the high priest, a log and a half in the morning and a log and a half towards evening.

For what purpose did the quarter-log serve? 
A quarter-log of water for the one with skin disease and a quarter-log of oil for the Nazirite.   
For what purpose did the half-log serve? 
A half-log of water for the sotah and a half-log of oil for the thanksgiving offering. 
With the log one measured [the oil] for all the grain offerings. 
Even a grain offering of sixty tenths required sixty logs [of oil].  
Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: even a grain offering of sixty tenths required only one log [of oil], for it is written, “For a grain offering, and a log of oil” (Leviticus 14:21).   
Six [logs] for a bull, four for a ram, and three for a lamb, three a half for the candlestick, a half-log for each lamp.

One may mix the libations of bulls with the libations of rams, or the libations of lambs with the libations of other lambs, or those of an individual offering with those of a communal offering, or those of [an offering from] today with those of [an offering from] yesterday;  
But one may not mix the libations of lambs with the libations of bulls or of rams.  
And if they mixed these on their own, and they mixed these on their own, and then they were mixed, they are valid.
But if before each was mixed [by itself they were mixed together], they are invalid.
The the lamb that was offered with the omer, even if its grain offering was doubled, its libations were not doubled. 

All the measures in the Temple were heaped except [that used for] the high priest's [grain offering] which included in itself the heaped amount.  
The overflow of the liquid-measures was holy, but the overflow of the dry-measures was not holy.  
Rabbi Akiva says: the liquid-measuring vessels were holy, therefore their overflow was holy too; the dry-measuring vessels were not holy, therefore their overflow was not holy.  
Rabbi Yose says: it is not because of this, but because liquids are stirred up and the dry measures are not.

All the offerings of the congregation and of the individual require libations except the first-born animal, the tithe of cattle, the pesah, the sin offering and the guilt offering; 
But the sin offering and the guilt offering of the one with skin disease do require libations.

All of the offerings of congregation do not require the laying on of hands except the bull that is offered for [the transgression] of any of the commandments, and the scapegoat.   
Rabbi Shimon says: also the goats offered for [the transgression] of idol worship.  
All the offerings of an individual require the laying on of hands except the first-born, the cattle tithe, and the pesah. 
And an heir may lay his hands [on them], and he may bring the libations, and can substitute [another animal for it]. 

All perform leaning except for a deaf-mute, a crazy person, a minor, a blind person, a non-Jew, a slave, a messenger, and a woman.  The Mitzvah of leaning is on the head and with two hands, the place they do the leaning is where they would slaughter the animal and immediately after leaning they would slaughter it.  
There is a stringency with laying on of hands is that is greater than with waving and with waving that is greater than laying on of hands. 
For an individual may wave on behalf of all the others, but an individual may not lay on hands on behalf of all the others. 
And there is a stringency with waving, for waving takes place for offerings of the individual and for offerings of the congregation, for living animals and for slaughtered animals, and for things that have life and for things that do not have life; but it is not so with laying on of the hands.


Chapter 10

Rabbi Ishmael says: On Shabbat the omer would come from three seahs [of barley] and on a weekday out of five. 
But the sages say: whether on Shabbat or on a weekday it would come from three seahs.
Rabbi Hanina the vice-high priest says: on Shabbat it was reaped by an individual with one sickle into one basket, and on a weekday it was reaped by three men into three baskets and with three sickles. 
But the sages say: whether on Shabbat or on a weekday it was reaped by three men into three baskets and with three sickles.  

The Commandment of the flour offering is to come from a nearby land.  If the ones close to Jerusalem were not yet ripe they could bring them from any place.  It once happened that it came from Gaggot Tzrifin and the Two Loaves came from the valley of Ein Socher. 
How would they [cut the omer]? The messengers of the court would go out on the eve of the holiday and they would tie them up while they were still attached to the ground so that they would be easy to cut.  And all cities that were near there would come so that it would be cut with a great fanfare.  Once it got dark, he would say to them, has the sun set? and they would answer yes.  Has the sun set? and they would answer yes.  Is this a sickle? and they would answer yes, is this a sickle? and they would answer yes.  Is this a basket, and they would answer yes, is this a basket? and they would answer yes.  On the Shabbat he would say to them is it Shabbat? and they would answer yes, is it Shabbat? and they would answer yes.  Should we cut? and they would answer Cut! Should we cut? and they would answer Cut!  Three times for each question and they would answer, Yes! Yes! Yes!  Why so much? To prove wrong the Baitusim who would say that the omer was only cut at the end of the holiday. 
They would cut it and place it in baskets.  It would be brought into the temple court yard and they would singe it with fire to fulfill the commandment of dry, says Rabbi Meir.  The sages say with reeds and stems they would beat it so that it would not get crushed.  They put it into a tube which was perforated so that the fire could reach all of it.  They would spread it out in the courtyard and the wind would blow it, it would then be placed in a the mill and an issaron of flour would be taken from it which was then sifted through thirteen sieves and the rest of the flour could be redeemed and eaten by anyone, it was obligated in Challah, but exempt from tithing. Rabbi Akiva said it was obligated in Challah and tithing.  He came to the issaron and put on its oil and frankincense, he poured and mixed, waves and touched the corner of the alter, took Kemitza and burned it and the remainder could be eaten by the priests.  
Once the omer was offered they used to go out and find the market of Jerusalem already full of flour and parched grain [of the new produce], against the will of the sages, the words of Rabbi Meir.  
Rabbi Judah says: it was with the will of the rabbis.  
Once the omer was offered the new grain was permitted immediately, but for those that lived far off it was permitted only after midday. 
After the Temple was destroyed Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai decreed that it should be forbidden throughout the day of the waving.    
Rabbi Judah said: Is it not forbidden by the Torah, for it is said, “Until this very day?” (Leviticus 23:14)  
Why was it permitted for those that lived far away from midday?   
Because they know that the court would not be lazy with it.


The omer permitted [new produce] in the rest of the country and the Two Loaves in the temple.  Flour offerings and first fruits [from the new produce] could not be brought before the omer, and if they were they were invalid.  They should not be brought before the Two Loaves, but if they were they are still valid. 
Wheat, barley, spelt, oats and rye are liable for hallah. 
And they join together.
They are forbidden [to be eaten] as new grain before the omer, and to be harvested before Pesah.   
If they had taken root before the omer, the omer permits them; 
And if not, they are forbidden until the next omer.

They may reap in irrigated fields in the valley [before the omer], but they may not stack it. 
The people of Jericho used to reap [before the omer] with the will of the sages, and used to stack it against the will of the sages, but the sages did not protest.   
One may reap for cattle feed.
Rabbi Judah said: When is this so? If one had begun to reap it before it had brought forth a third of its growth.  
Rabbi Shimon says: one may even reap it and feed [his cattle with it] even after it has brought forth a third of its growth.

One may harvest because of the small plants [so they can grow healthily] before a house of morning, and to prevent disruption of learning in the Beit Midrash.  One should not bind them but rather leave them in piles.  The commandment of the omer is to come from standing grain.  If he did not find, he should bring from bundled grain.  Its commandment was to come moist, if he could not find, he should bring it from the dry.  Its commandment was to be cut at night but if it was cut during the day it is still valid and it overrides the Shabbat. 

Chapter 11

The Two loaves were kneaded one at a time and baked one at a time.  The Panim bread were kneaded one at a time and baked two at a time.  They were made in a mold and when he took them out of the oven he would place them in a mold so they wouldn't spoil.  
Both the Two Loaves and the Panim bread, were kneaded and molded outside the temple but baked inside the temple and they do not override Shabbat. Rabbi Yehuda says the entire process took place inside the courtyard.  Rabbi Shimon says, one should accustom himself to say, the Two Loaves and the Panim Bread are valid in the courtyard and in the house of Pagi [which was outside the temple].
The high priest's cakes were kneaded formed and baked inside the temple courtyard and they override Shabbat.  Their grinding and sifting do not override the Shabbat.  Rabbi Akiva said a general rule:  Anything which can be done before Shabbat does not override the Shabbat, and whatever cannot be done before the Shabbat does override the Shabbat. 
All flour offerings require a vessel while inside the courtyard but not while outside.  How so?  The Two Loaves, were seven fists long, four fists wide and their horns were four fingers tall.  The Panim Bread was ten fists long, five fists wide and its horns were seven fingers.  Rabbi Yehuda said, so one should not err, ZaDad Yehaz [the numeric value of the hebrew letters is 7,4,4 and 10,5,7].  Ben Zoma says "and you shall place on the table Panim bread always"  that it must have faces. 
The table: its length was ten handbreadths and its width, five ; the showbread its length was ten handbreadths and its width five . He would place its long side across the breadth of the table, and he would fold up two and a half handbreadths on this side and two and half on this side so that its length filled the entire breadth of the table, the words of Rabbi Judah.  
Rabbi Meir says: the table: its length was twelve handbreadths and its width six ; the showbread its length was ten handbreadths and its width five . He would place its long sided across the breadth of the table, and he would fold up two handbreadths on this side and two on this side ; and there was a space of two handbreadths between [the two sets] so that the wind could blow between them.   
Abba Shaul says: there they used to put the two dishes of frankincense for the showbread.
They said to him:  Has it not already been said, “And you shall put pure frankincense upon [al] each row” (Leviticus 24:7)?   
He replied, But has it not also been said, “And next unto [al] him shall be the tribe of Manasseh” (Numbers 2:20)? 

There were four golden attachments there split at the top and they would support two rods for one stack and two rods for the other.  And there were 28 reeds like half a hollow reed fourteen for one stack and fourteen for the other. Neither the arrangement of the reeds or their removal override Shabbat rather he goes in on Friday and take them out and places them lengthwise across the table.  All of the vessels in the temple were placed lengthwise with the length of the Sanctuary.  
There were two tables in the anti-chamber at the entrance to the Sanctuary, one was made of marble and the other of gold.  The one of marble is where they would place the Panim-bread on its way into the sanctuary and on the gold one as it left, because we go up in sanctity and not down.  And there was one gold one inside where the Panim bread would be left always.  Four priests would enter.  Two of them had the two stacks and the other two had two spoons.  Four would walk before them, two to take the two stacks and two to take the two spoons.  The ones bringing in bread would stand in the north side and face south and those taking out bread would stand in the south and face north.  These would take out as those would place down a fistful removing against a fistful placing as it says (Exodus 25) "before me always".  Rabbi Yossi says, even if these completely pulled it off before these put down the new stack is considered constantly. They would leave and place [the bread] on the golden table in the anti-chamber.  Once they offered the spoons [of frankincense] the bread would be given out to the priests.  If Yom Kippur fell on Shabbat, the bread would be given out that night.  If Yom Kippur was on Friday, the goat of Yom Kippur is eaten that night.  The Babylonians would eat it raw because they were not timid about eating raw meat.   
If he arranged the bread on Shabbat and the spoons after Shabbat, but he offered the spoons on the following Shabbat it is invalid, and it is not subject to piggul, being left past its time or touching it while impure. If he arranged the bread and the spoons on Shabbat but offered the spoons after the following Shabbat  it is invalid, and it is not subject to piggul, being left past its time or touching it while impure.  If he arranged the bread and the spoons after Shabbat but offered the spoons on the following Shabbat it is invalid.  How should he do it?  He should leave it to the following Shabbat because even if it is on the table for many days, there is nothing wrong.  
The Two Loaves were eaten on no less than the second day [from their baking] and no greater than the third day.  How so, they were baked on the day before Yom Tov [Shavuot] and eaten on Yom Tov which is the second day.  If Yom Tov fell after Shabbat, then they were eaten on the third day.  The Panim bread were eaten no less than nine days [after their baking] and no greater than eleven.  How so, they were baked on Friday and eaten the following Shabbat, which is nine days.  If Yom Tov fell on Friday then they would be eaten on the tenth day.  If the two days of the New Year fell before Shabbat then they were eaten on the eleventh day.  And they do not override Shabbat or Yom Tov.  Raban Shimon Ben Gamliel said in the name of Rabbi Shimmon son of the Deputy High-Priest, they do override Yom Tov but not the Fast Day [Yom Kippur]. 

Chapter 12

The flour offerings and libations that became impure before they became sanctified in a vessel, they can be redeemed.  Once they have become sanctified in a vessel, they can no longer be redeemed.  Birds, wood, frankincense and temple vessels cannot be redeemed because redemption was only stated by animals.  
One who says I will bring a frying pan [flour offering] but he brought it in a deep-frying pan.  If he said I will bring in a deep-frying pan but he brought in a frying pan, what he brought he brought but he did not fulfill his obligation.  To bring this [flour] in a frying pan but he brought it in a deep-frying pan or to bring this one in a deep-frying pan but he brought in a frying pan, it is invalid.  If he said I will bring two issarons [of flour] in one vessel, but he brought it in two vessels or he said in two vessels but he brought in one, what he brought he brought but he did not fulfill his obligation.  These to bring in one vessel and he brought them in two or these two vessels and he brought them in one vessel, these are invalid.  If he said I will bring two issarons in one vessel and he brought them in two vessels, and they warned he that his vow was for one vessel, if he brought it in one vessel it is valid, in two vessels it is invalid.  If he said I will bring two issarons in two vessels and he brought it in one vessel and they told him, you vowed in two vessels, if he brought it in two vessels it is valid, he brought it in one vessel it is as if two flour offerings became mixed. 
If he said I accept upon myself a flour offering from barley, he can bring it from wheat.  From flour, he can bring it from fine flour.  Without oil or frankincense he can bring it with oil and frankincense.  Only half an issaron, he can bring it as a full issaron.  One and a half issarons, he must bring two.  Rabbi Shimon exempts him since he did not vow the way people usually do.  
One can vow a flour offering of up to 60 Issaron and bring it in one vessel.  If he said, I will bring one of 61 Issaron he can bring 60 in one vessel and one in the other vessels, because the congregation brings on the first day of Sukkot that fell on Shabbat 61 Issaron. It is enough that the individual should be less than then congregation by one.  Rabbi Shimon says, but some of these are for the bulls and others for the sheep and they cannot be mixed with one another, rather until 60 they can be mixed up.  They said to him, 60 can be mixed but 61 cannot?  He said to them, all of the measurements of the sages are this way.  In forty Se'ah he immerses, in 40 se'ah minus a kartov he cannot immerse.  One cannot vow one log, two or five, but he could vow three four six or more than six. 
One can vow wine, but not oil, says Rabbi Akiva.  Rabbi Tarfon says one can vow Oil.  Rabbi Tarfon says, just as we see by wine that it comes both as an obligation and as a vow, so too oil comes as an obligation and a vow.  Rabbi Akiva responded to him, no so! If you say by wine which can be brought as an obligation on its own, could we say the same thing about oil which cannot be brought on its own.  Two people cannot vow one Issaron but they can vow an Olah and a Shelamim, and by birds even one bird.  

Chapter 13

I take upon myself an Issaron he should bring one.  Esronim [plural] he should bring two.  I specified, but I don't remember what I specified, he must bring 60 Issarons.  If he said I take upon myself a flour offering he can bring which ever type he wants.  Rabbi Yehuda says he should bring a fine-flour mincha because it is the most special of the flour offerings.  
A flour offering or a type of flour offering he brings one type.  Flour offerings or a type of flour offerings he brings two types.  I specified, but I don't remember what I specified he must bring all five.  I specified a flour offering of Esronim [multiple Issaron] and I don't know what i've specified he must bring a flour offering of 60 Issaron.  Rebbi says he should bring flour offerings from one until 60 Issaron. 
I take upon myself wood, he cannot bring less than two logs.  Frankincense, he cannot bring less than a Kometz.  There are five types of Kometz, one who says I take upon myself Frankincense cannot bring less than a Kometz, if he vows a flour offering he must bring with it a Kometz and Frankincense.  One who offers a Kometz outside the temple si liable.  The two spoons require two Kometz.  
I take upon myself gold,  he cannot bring less than a dinar of gold. Silver, he cannot bring less than a dinar of silver.  Copper, he cannot bring less than a ma'ah of silver.  I specified but I don't remember what I specified, he brings until he says I definitely did not mean to bring this much.  
“I take upon myself to bring wine,” he must bring no less than three logs.  
“Oil,” he must bring no less than one log;  
Rabbi says: three logs.  
“I specified [how much I would bring] but I do not know how much I specified,” he must bring the most that is brought on any one day. 

 “I take upon myself a burnt offering,” he must bring a lamb.    
Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah say: or a turtle-dove or a young pigeon. 
“I specified one of the herd but I do not know what it was I specified,” he must bring a bull and a calf. 
“I specified] of cattle but I do not know what it was I specified,” he must bring a bull, a bull calf, a ram, a goat, a kid, and a lamb. 
 “I specified but I do not know what it was I specified,” he must add to these a turtle-dove and a young pigeon.

 “I take upon myself a thanksgiving offering or a wellbeing offering,” he must bring a lamb.
“I specified of the herd but I do not know what it was I specified,” he must bring a bull and a cow, a he-calf and a she-calf. 
“Of the cattle but I do not know what it was I specified,” he must bring a bull and a cow, a he-calf and a she-calf, a ram and a ewe, a he-goat and a she-goat, a he-kid and a she-kid, a he-lamb and a she-lamb.

“I take upon myself an ox,” he must bring one with its libations to the value of a maneh. 
“A calf,” he must bring one with its libations to the value of five selas. 
“A ram,” he must bring one with its libations to the value of two selas.  
“A lamb,” he must bring one with its libations to the value of one sela. 
“An ox valued at one maneh,” he must bring one worth a maneh apart from its libations .
“A calf valued at five selas,” he must bring one worth five selas apart from its libations.
“A ram valued at two selas,” he must bring one worth two selas apart from its libations.
“A lamb valued at one sela,” he must bring one worth one sela apart from its libations. 
"An ox valued at a maneh,” and he brought two together worth a maneh, he has not fulfilled his obligation, even if one was worth a maneh less one denar and the other also was worth a maneh less one denar. 
“A black one” and he brought a white one, or “a white one” and he brought a black one, or “a large one” and he brought a small one, he has not fulfilled his obligation. 
"A small one” and he brought a large one, he has fulfilled his obligation; 
Rabbi says: he has not fulfilled his obligation.

“This ox shall be an burnt offering,” and it becomes blemished, if he wants he may bring two with its price. 
“These two oxen are for a burnt offering,” and they become blemished, if he wants he may bring one ox with their price. 
Rabbi forbids it.   
“This ram shall be an burnt offering,” and it becomes blemished, if he wants he may bring a lamb with its price. 
“This lamb shall be a burnt offering,” and it becomes blemished, if he wants he may bring a ram with its price. 
Rabbi forbids it.
One who says, “One of my lambs shall be holy,” or “one of my oxen shall be holy,” and he had only two, the larger one is holy. 
If he had three, the middle one is holy. 
“I specified one but I do not know which it was I specified,” or [if he said,] “My father told me [that he had specified one] but I do not know which it is,” the largest one among them is holy.

“I take upon myself a burnt offering,” he must offer it in the Temple.  
And if he offered it in the Temple of Onias, he has not fulfilled his obligation. 
“I take upon myself to offer a burnt offering but I will offer it in the Temple of Onias,” he must offer it in the Temple, yet if he offered it in the Temple of Onias he has fulfilled his obligation.  
Rabbi Shimon says: this is not an burnt offering. 
“I will be a nazirite,” he must shave in the Temple.
And if he shaved in the Temple of Onias he has not fulfilled his obligation. 
"That I will shave in the Temple of Onias,” he must shave in the Temple, but if he shaved in the Temple of Onias he has fulfilled his obligation.  
Rabbi Shimon says: this one is not a nazirite.  
The priests who served in the Temple of Onias may not serve in the Temple in Jerusalem; and needless to say [this is so of priests who served] something else; for it is said, “The priests of the shrines, however, did not ascend the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem. But they did eat unleavened bread along with their kinsmen” (II Kings 23:9).   
Thus they are like those that had a blemish: they are entitled to share and eat [of the holy things] but they are not permitted to offer sacrifices.


It is said of the burnt offering of cattle, “An offering made by fire of pleasing odor” (Leviticus 1:9);   and of the burnt offering of birds, “An offering made by fire of pleasing odor (vs. 17); and of the  grain offering, “An offering made by fire of pleasing odor” (Leviticus 2:2): to teach you that it is the same whether one offers much or little, so long as one directs one’s heart to heaven.