Sefer HaChinukh
ספר החינוך
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Mitzvah 1

The mitzvah of procreation: In parshat Bereishit there is one positive commandment and that is the mitzvah of procreation as it says (Genesis 1:28): 'And God blessed them and told them to procreate'.
The root of this mitzvah (i.e the reason behind this commandment) is that the world should be settled (B.T Gittin 41b) because God wants the world to be settled as it says (Isaiah 45:18)'I did not create it for naught, but [rather] formed it for habitation'. This is a big mitzvah with which all the mitzvos are observed because [the Torah] was given to humans [who need to procreate] and not to angels [who don't].
The laws of this mitzva including when a man is obligated to engage himself in it, and how many sons he needs to have, and what other mitzvot he is exempt from due to his involvement in procreation, as well as many other laws are explained in the sixth chapter of tractate Yevamot (61b and 62b) and in Berachot (16a). [It is also codified as practical law in] Shulcan Aruch [section] Even Haezer chapter 1, and in [section] Orach Chaim chapter 70:3.
This [mitzvah] applies in all places and at all times (in history-not every moment of one's life) (Kidushin  36b), and a person is obligated to engage in this mitzvah when it is fitting for him and this is the age which the sages (Avot 5:21) says to marry a woman [which is age 18]. This mitzvah is not obligatory for woman. One who refrains from this mitzvah is responsible for not engaging in a positive commandment and his punishment is very great (Kiddushin 29b) because he shows that he does not want to fulfill God's will to settle the world.

Mitzvah 2



Mitzvah 3



Mitzvah 4



Mitzvah 5



Mitzvah 6



Mitzvah 7



Mitzvah 8



Mitzvah 9



Mitzvah 10



Mitzvah 11



Mitzvah 12



Mitzvah 13



Mitzvah 14



Mitzvah 15



Mitzvah 16



Mitzvah 17



Mitzvah 18



Mitzvah 19



Mitzvah 20



Mitzvah 21



Mitzvah 22



Mitzvah 23



Mitzvah 24



Mitzvah 25



Mitzvah 26



Mitzvah 27



Mitzvah 28



Mitzvah 29



Mitzvah 30



Mitzvah 31



Mitzvah 32



Mitzvah 33



Mitzvah 34



Mitzvah 35



Mitzvah 36



Mitzvah 37



Mitzvah 38



Mitzvah 39



Mitzvah 40



Mitzvah 41



Mitzvah 42



Mitzvah 43



Mitzvah 44



Mitzvah 45



Mitzvah 46



Mitzvah 47



Mitzvah 48



Mitzvah 49



Mitzvah 50



Mitzvah 51



Mitzvah 52



Mitzvah 53



Mitzvah 54



Mitzvah 55



Mitzvah 56



Mitzvah 57



Mitzvah 58



Mitzvah 59



Mitzvah 60



Mitzvah 61



Mitzvah 62



Mitzvah 63



Mitzvah 64



Mitzvah 65



Mitzvah 66



Mitzvah 67



Mitzvah 68



Mitzvah 69



Mitzvah 70



Mitzvah 71



Mitzvah 72



Mitzvah 73



Mitzvah 74



Mitzvah 75



Mitzvah 76



Mitzvah 77



Mitzvah 78



Mitzvah 79



Mitzvah 80



Mitzvah 81



Mitzvah 82



Mitzvah 83



Mitzvah 84



Mitzvah 85



Mitzvah 86



Mitzvah 87



Mitzvah 88



Mitzvah 89



Mitzvah 90



Mitzvah 91



Mitzvah 92



Mitzvah 93



Mitzvah 94



Mitzvah 95



Mitzvah 96



Mitzvah 97



Mitzvah 98



Mitzvah 99



Mitzvah 100



Mitzvah 101



Mitzvah 102



Mitzvah 103



Mitzvah 104



Mitzvah 105



Mitzvah 106



Mitzvah 107



Mitzvah 108



Mitzvah 109



Mitzvah 110



Mitzvah 111



Mitzvah 112



Mitzvah 113



Mitzvah 114



Mitzvah 115



Mitzvah 116



Mitzvah 117



Mitzvah 118



Mitzvah 119



Mitzvah 120



Mitzvah 121



Mitzvah 122



Mitzvah 123



Mitzvah 124



Mitzvah 125



Mitzvah 126



Mitzvah 127



Mitzvah 128



Mitzvah 129



Mitzvah 130



Mitzvah 131



Mitzvah 132



Mitzvah 133



Mitzvah 134



Mitzvah 135



Mitzvah 136



Mitzvah 137



Mitzvah 138



Mitzvah 139



Mitzvah 140



Mitzvah 141



Mitzvah 142



Mitzvah 143



Mitzvah 144



Mitzvah 145



Mitzvah 146



Mitzvah 147



Mitzvah 148



Mitzvah 149



Mitzvah 150



Mitzvah 151



Mitzvah 152



Mitzvah 153



Mitzvah 154



Mitzvah 155



Mitzvah 156



Mitzvah 157



Mitzvah 158



Mitzvah 159



Mitzvah 160



Mitzvah 161



Mitzvah 162



Mitzvah 163



Mitzvah 164



Mitzvah 165



Mitzvah 166



Mitzvah 167



Mitzvah 168



Mitzvah 169



Mitzvah 170



Mitzvah 171



Mitzvah 172



Mitzvah 173



Mitzvah 174



Mitzvah 175



Mitzvah 176



Mitzvah 177



Mitzvah 178



Mitzvah 179



Mitzvah 180



Mitzvah 181



Mitzvah 182



Mitzvah 183



Mitzvah 184



Mitzvah 185



Mitzvah 186



Mitzvah 187



Mitzvah 188



Mitzvah 189



Mitzvah 190



Mitzvah 191



Mitzvah 192



Mitzvah 193



Mitzvah 194



Mitzvah 195



Mitzvah 196



Mitzvah 197



Mitzvah 198



Mitzvah 199



Mitzvah 200



Mitzvah 201



Mitzvah 202



Mitzvah 203



Mitzvah 204



Mitzvah 205



Mitzvah 206



Mitzvah 207



Mitzvah 208



Mitzvah 209



Mitzvah 210



Mitzvah 211



Mitzvah 212



Mitzvah 213



Mitzvah 214



Mitzvah 215



Mitzvah 216



Mitzvah 217



Mitzvah 218



Mitzvah 219



Mitzvah 220



Mitzvah 221



Mitzvah 222



Mitzvah 223



Mitzvah 224



Mitzvah 225



Mitzvah 226



Mitzvah 227



Mitzvah 228



Mitzvah 229



Mitzvah 230



Mitzvah 231



Mitzvah 232



Mitzvah 233



Mitzvah 234



Mitzvah 235



Mitzvah 236



Mitzvah 237



Mitzvah 238



Mitzvah 239



Mitzvah 240



Mitzvah 241



Mitzvah 242



Mitzvah 243



Mitzvah 244



Mitzvah 245



Mitzvah 246



Mitzvah 247



Mitzvah 248



Mitzvah 249



Mitzvah 250



Mitzvah 251



Mitzvah 252



Mitzvah 253



Mitzvah 254



Mitzvah 255



Mitzvah 256



Mitzvah 257



Mitzvah 258



Mitzvah 259



Mitzvah 260



Mitzvah 261



Mitzvah 262



Mitzvah 263



Mitzvah 264



Mitzvah 265



Mitzvah 266



Mitzvah 267



Mitzvah 268



Mitzvah 269



Mitzvah 270

It is forbidden for the High priest to enter a tent that contains a dead body, even if the deceased is one of the 'six relatives' as it is written, "For all dead he shall not come."  that is, he should not enter a house that holds them, for the term 'come' implies entrance into a house.
The root of the mitzvah is similar to what I wrote earlier in Mitzvah 266 in this Parasha, that the priests should keep their distance from the whole notion of ritual impurity because they are always involved in serving God, and the High Priest is distinguished to be Holy of Holies; though he is a human, his thoughts are forever in the elevated spheres.  The Torah therefor was not concerned with permitted him to become defiled under any circumstance, even for the relatives where the Torah is concerned about [the well being of] the ordinary priest who will pour out his soul in the house of mourning because of the emotional closeness he feels to the deceased.  the Hight Priest, by contrast, is so throughly bound to loftier pursuits and is entirely separate from human nature.  He has lost any memory of this fleeting world; he will not weep for the loss of one of his society because he was already apart from them in life.  As far as the laws of impurity that comes from the dead, and the details of the tent of the dead, I have already spoken some according to my usual habit in this Parasha, and I will not repeat it least it become burdensome for the reader.
This prohibition applied when the Temple sttod and there was a High Priest wherever he may be.  even if on some occasion he left Israel he is still forbidden from entering the tent of the dead.  If he transgressed and entered intentionally, even if his father or mother were dead in the house, he is flogged.

Mitzvah 271



Mitzvah 272

A High Priest must marry a virgin maiden - The High Priest must marry a virgin maiden as it is written, "He shall take as a wife a virgin."  The proof that this is a commandment is from the statement of the Sages of Blessed Memory that, "Rabbi Akiva would consider the progeny of a forbidden union illegitimate even if the transgression was only a positive commandment."  They explained that this a case where a High Priest cohabits with a woman who is not a virgin, who is prohibited on the strength of a positive commandment,  for consider it a principle that the negative consequence of a positive commandment is counted as a positive commandment.  Those of Blessed Memory also said, "He is cautioned on the widow and commanded on the virgin."
From the root of the commandment: Since the principle good that can be achieved by a person is the maintain clean and pure thoughts, for the thoughts are drawn after the bodily deeds, therefor it is proper for the highest servant to cling to a woman who has never had thoughts for another man, only for him who is Holy of Holies, and through that the children that HaShem gives him will be pure and clean and fit for holy service.  Perhaps you will say, "How can we know if this maid has thought lustfully about another man?"  The response is that for as long as the thought has not been actualized is does not disqualify her, but anytime she had cohabited she is disqualified. Even though Those of Blessed Memory said, "when she matures she is prohibited," the idea is that once she has matured so much her thoughts are pure evil, and perhaps she lusted after another, and since she is an adult her evil thoughts count as a deed.

Mitzvah 273



Mitzvah 274



Mitzvah 275

Is is forbidden for a blemished priest to serve in the Temple - A blemished priest may not serve in the Temple as it is written (Lev. 21:17), "A man from your descendants in their generations who has a blemish shall not serve to bring forth the bread of his Lord."  This means that he may not perform the service, because all types of food are called bread in many places (see Rashi Gen. 31:54).  The blemish refered to in this context is permanent, as is explained in the Sifra (Emor 3:5), "'Who has a blemish shall not serve' only includes a permanent blemish, how do we know to include a transient blemish?  The verse says in the same section, 'any man who has a blemish shall not come close.'"  Examples of  permanent blemishes include  eczema and boils that are raised.
From the root of the mitzvah: Since people ascribe value to activities based on the importance of the performers of those activities. A person who appears important and well mannered will find more favor in all that he does before those who see him. In the opposite case, a person who is of low form and unusual appearance will seem unworthy in the eyes of his beholders if his actions are any less than perfect.  It is therefor appropriate that the person on whom atonement depends be of pleasant appearance in all facets so that people will attach their thoughts to him.  Aside from this, it is possible that in his perfect form there is a hint to certain concepts, for as a person contemplates[the perfect form] he will purify his soul and elevate it.  Therefor it is improper for there to be anything unusual in any form in him, lest the soul of the contemplative be scattered due to the anomaly, for it would then be moved from the purpose.
The laws of the mitzvah:  What Those of Blessed Memory (TBM) said (Talmud, Bechorot 43a), that there are three kinds of blemishes.  Some blemishes disqualify a priest from performing the service, and if similar blemishes were to be found on an animal, the animal would be ineligible to be offered as a sacrifice.   Some other blemishes disqualify a person from the service but do not disqualify an animal as a sacrifice.  And some other blemishes disqualify neither a man nor an animal, and our only concern is the perception of a blemish.  Any priest that shows any of these blemishes may not serve.  Only external blemishes disqualify a person, but blemishes that are inside of his body, like a missing kidney or spleen, or a punctured intestine, even though they render him terminally ill, his service is still valid.  This is because of the verse, "a broken leg or hand" just as those are external, so too must all disqualifying blemishes be external.  The Sages enumerated (Rambam, Laws of Biat Mikdash 7:8) 50 blemishes that disqualify both people and animals, 23 that are unique to animals, for a total of 73 in animals.  There are also 90 blemishes that are unique to people, for a total of 143 blemishes in people.  The categories of the 90 that are unique to people are as follow: eight in the head; two in the neck; four in the ears; five in the  shoulders; four in the eye lids; eleven in the eyes; six in the nose; three in the lips; three in the abdomen; three in the back; six in the hands; four in the genitals; fifteen in the thighs and legs; four in the general form of the body; eight in the skin tone.  Four more significant blemishes apply to people that are not external, and these are: deaf-mute; mental retardation; malnutrition (even temporary); and a person who produces a foul odor (even if the timing is predictable).  In addition to these there are two more that present problems of public perception, and these are: One whose eyelashes have fallen off, even though a meaningful amount remains at the root, and one who removed his teeth.
These are the categories of the fifty disqualifying blemishes that apply to people and animals: five in the ear; three in the eyelid, and these three are included in the term 'gouged' that is used in the Torah; eight in the eye; three in the nose; six in the mouth; twelve in the genitals; six in the arms and legs; four that can be anywhere on the body, and these are the 'eczema' that is mention in the Torah, a protrusion that has a bony form, and this is the 'boil' of the Torah, one who has even a small Egyptian coloring, which is the 'yalefet' mentioned in the Torah,  and any bone that displays a crack, which is the 'harutz' mentioned in the Torah. Ribs are not considered viewable bones.  There are three more: an old individual who shakes when standing; a sick one who trembles because of weakness (though terminal illness is only a disqualifier of animals, as is birth by Caesarian); a repulsive one.  That totals fifty.  More details are found in the seventh chapter of Tractate Bechorot.
The mitzvah applied to priests when the Temple stood, and one who transgressed this prohibition and served with a blemish, if the blemish would also disqualify an animal, whether the service was performed inadvertently or deliberately, it is invalid, and he is flogged if he acted deliberately.  They also said in the Sifra (Emor 3:11): A blemished [priest] is not punished with death; he has only transgressed a negative prohibition.  If the blemish was one of the ninety that are unique to people, even though he is flogged, the service is still valid.  If the blemish was one that is only perceived as problematic he is not flogged and his service is valid.

Mitzvah 276



Mitzvah 277



Mitzvah 278



Mitzvah 279



Mitzvah 280

It is forbidden for any stranger to eat the gift portion of the grain - A stranger [i.e. a non-priest] may not eat the gift portion [the grain set aside for the priest] as it is written (Leviticus 22:10), "any foreigner may not eat the sacred."  The accepted understanding (Talmud, Pesachim 23a) is that this "sacred" refers exclusively to the gift (teruma) portion, and anything that is called a gift, but it does not include other types of sacred things.  What is also called a gift?  These are the first fruits, as Those of Blessed Memory (TOBM) derive from the tradition (Talmud, Pesachim 36b), "'And the gist of your hand' (Deuteronomy 12:17), there are the first fruits."
From the root of the mitzvah: It is like the preceding mitzvah.  And it is the esteemed position of the sacred that dictates that only the servants of HaShem and their wives, children, and acquired slaves, and that they should give them to their cattle and all their animals, but not to others.
The laws of the mitzvah include:  The statement of TOBM (Talmud, Gittin 12b) that a runaway slave of a priest does eat the teruma, becasue he is still his acquired property.  Also, a rebellious wife may eat, and any wife of a priest may eat, even if she is only three years and one day old.  Also, the betrothed bride of a priest would have been eligible to eat, but the Sages decreed that she may not until they are fully married, as is explained in the beginning of the fifth chapter of Ketubot (Talmud Ketubot 57b).  A Hebrew servant does not eat, because the Torah forbids both the perennial worker and the annual worker, as it is written, "The boarder of a priest and his worker may not eat the sacred" (Leviticus 22:10).  But a non-Jewish slave does eat, because he is his acquired property.  Also, if the slave acquires other slaves they may eat because of his rights. This is because implicit in the expression, "when he acquires with an acquisition" (Leviticus 22:11), that the acquired is acquiring.  If, however, the second-tier slave acquires a third-tier slave, that slave may not eat, because it is 'when the soul acquires,' the Torah allows only one level of acquisition.  Any priestess who had relations with someone who disqualifies from the priesthood is permanently forbidden from eating teruma (Talmud, Yebamot 65a).  The same is true for an androgynous priest, whether the androgynous individual filled the role of the male or the female in the relations.  Even a strecher, that is a person who stretched his foreskin so that he would appear uncircumcised is rabinically proscribed from eating until he receives a second circumcision (Talmud, Yebamot 72a).  Many other details are explained in Tractate Terumot.
The prohibition against non-priests eating teruma applies to all Jews, male and female, wherever teruma applies on a Torah level.  That is, when the Land of Israel is settled, for then the obligation of teruma exist biblically, as we will, with the help of HaShem, write in Seder Shoftim (Sefer HaChinukh, 507) on the mitzvah of separating the main teruma.  In the present time the prohibition applies rabbinically to produce that is grown in Israel, as we will write there.  One who transgressed and ate teruma and is a non-priest, or even if he or she is a priest who was demoted from the priesthood through one of the mechanisms of demotion that have been taught to us by our Sages OBM, is punished with death from above, and is explained in the ninth chapter of Sanhedrin (Talmud, Sanhedrin 83b) from the verse, "They shall die through it because they have profaned it" (Leviticus 22:9), and after that is written, "Any stranger should not eat the sacred."

Mitzvah 281



Mitzvah 282



Mitzvah 283



Mitzvah 284



Mitzvah 285



Mitzvah 286



Mitzvah 287

It is forbidden to place a blemish on a consecrated animal - It is forbidden to place a blemish on a consecrated animal, that, we must not make wound or fracture an animal that is consecrated for the altar in a manner that disqualifies it as an offering as it is written, "Any blemish shall not be in it" (Leviticus 22:21).  TOBM said, "Read it as 'do not make in it'" (Talmud, Menchot 56b).  The Sifra says, "'Any blemish shall not be in it,' do not place a blemish in it. (Sifra, Emor 7:9)"
From the root of the mitzvah: It would be disgraceful for the sacred article, and I have already written many time (Sefer HaChinukh 95) on the value to the heart of man that can be realized through esteeming the glory of the Holy Temple, those who serve there, and its offerings.
From the laws of the mitzvah: What they said that one transgresses and is flogged whether the blemish is placed on the consecrated animal or its substitue.  This is not true for the first-born or the tithe offering, wherein if one who blemishes the substitute is not flogged because they cannot be offered as sacrifices as is explained in Temura (Talmud, Temura 21:1).  More details are explained in places throughout Tractates Zevachim and Temura.
The mitzvah always applies to men and women, but the lashes could only incurred be incurred when the Holy Temple stood, because then the animal could be sacrificed, as is explained in Avodah Zarah (Talmud, Avoda Zara 13b).

Mitzvah 288



Mitzvah 289



Mitzvah 290



Mitzvah 291



Mitzvah 292



Mitzvah 293



Mitzvah 294

It is forbidden to slaughter an animal and its offspring on the same day - We may not slaughter an animal and its offspring on the same, whether they be sacred or mundane, as it is written, "It and its son you shall not slaughter on one day" (Leviticus 22:28).
From the root of the mitzvah: A person should pay attention to the fact that HaShem's concern for the world extends to all living things.  If HaShem is concerned for them they should endure eternally, because His concern for things is itself their sustenance.  Therefore no species should ever be annihilated from the Earth.  Even though He is concerned for the human species as individuals (as I explained earlier in Parshat Tazria (Sefer HaChinuck, 169))  this is not the case for other species.  For them His concern is for the species as a whole, and we are therefore forbidden from destroying the tree and its offshoots at once, to hint to this.  We can also explain simply that this inspires compassion within us and distances us from cruelty (which is a bad trait).  Therefore, even though we are permitted to use animals to sustain us we are forbidden from slaughtering the parent and offspring on one day, to instill the characteristic of compassion within our souls.
The laws of the mitzvah: What TOBM said (Talmud, Chullin 82a) that it does not matter of the mother is slaughtered or the offspring; and what they said (Talmud, Chullin 83a) that are four times during the year one who sells an animal to his fellow must inform him if the mother has also been sold for slaughter, because at these four times the purchaser presumably intends to slaughter the animal immediately.  The times are: the eve of the lat day of Sukkot; the eve of the first day of Passover; the eve of Shavuot; and the eve of Rosh HaShanna.  According to rabbi Yosi HaGalili the same applies to the even of Yom Kippur in the Galil.  The obligation to inform rests exclusively on the seller; the buyer need not ask because there is a double doubt.  He does not know if the animal's mother is still living, and even if it is, he does not know if it was sold for slaughter;  They also said (Talmud, Chullin 82a) that if two people buy an animal and its offspring the one who made the first purchase has first rights to slaughter, but if the second broke the rule and did slaughter first, the first one may still not slaughter.  There is also the law of slaughtering a cow and two of her offspring or two offspring and then the cow, and the law of slaughtering her and her 'daughter' and her 'granddaughter'.  It is permitted to slaughter the 'grandmother' and 'granddaughter', because the Torah only forbids "it and its offspring."
They also said that one who slaughters the 'grandmother' and 'granddaughter' and then the 'daughter'  is flogged only 40 times, even though there are two simultaneous transgressions, it is still one deed.
They also said (Talmud, Chullin 78b) that the prohibition only applies to mother animals because the Torah says 'its offspring', meaning the one who the offspring is attached to, and that is the mother.  Neverhteless, the Talmud concludes (Talmud, Chullin 79a, according to the proper understanding) that if we conclusively know that this is the father it may not be slaughtered on the same day as the offspring, because the law follows Rabbi Yehuda.  Rabbi Yehuda seems to be uncertain if we concern ourselves with the male parentage, because he says that a mule may not be mated with a horse or a donkey, but only with another mule.  If he truly believed that the male parentage is not followed he would not have said that, instead he would have said the mule may be mated with another mule that shares a maternal type.  Instead he is in doubt, and when he said that we do not concern ourselves with paternity he meant that we cannot be lenient on that basis, but we must be strict when relevant.   In any place that a stringency will result from ignoring paternity, then we ignore it, because it is a case of doubt so we must be strict in every place.  In light of this I say that if we conclusively know the identity of the father we should be concerned for "it and its offspring."  More details are explained in the eighth chapter of Tractate Chullin.
The mitzvah applies everywhere and at all times to both men and women.  One who trangressed and slaughter an animal and its offspring on one day, or the offspring and then the animal, is flogged.

Mitzvah 295

We must not do anything that profanes the Name of Heaven between one person and his fellow - It is forbidden to profane the Blessed Name, which is the opposite of sanctifying the Name which we are commanded (as we will write in the following mitzvah) as it is written, "Do not profane My holy Name" (Leviticus 22:32).  The editor wrote in the name of Maimonides (Sefer HaMitzvot, Negative Precept #63) that this sin has three components, two of which are on the public on one pertains to the individual.  The first is in any case that one is asked to transgress one of the mitzvot during a time of persecution, and the enforcer intends for this to be a transgression, whether the mitzvah is severe or nor, or if one is asked to transgress idolatry, sexual impropriety, or murder even during a non-persecutory time, he must give his life and be killed rather than transgressing.  If he transgressed and did not die he has profraned the Name in public, and he has violated this commandment, and his sin is very serious.  Nevertheless he is not flogged as he was coerced, and the court can only enforce corporal punishment for deliberate transgression, where there are witnesses and warning.  The Sifra (Kedoshim 4:13) says, on the verse "If one gives his children to Molech, I will place My face against that person," That TOBM said "That person, and not a case of coercion, nor indavertency, nor confusion."  I have already explained that a person who commits an act of idolatry under coerced cicumatances is not punished with kareit, and he is certainly not executed.  He has violated the prohibition against profaning the Name.
The second type is if a person commits a sin without desire or pursuit of pleasure, but his action is intended to infuriate [God].  This is also profaning the Name and he is flogged, and this is why it says, "And do not swear falsely in My name and profane the Name of your Lord."  In this case the person shows his anger with this thing where there is not physical pleasure in it.  The compoment which addresses the individual is if a person who is well known as a kind person who acts well and commits one misdeed, something that is unfitting for a person of pious character, even if it is a permissible act, he has profaned the Name.  This is what the TOBM said (Talmud, Yoma 86a), "What is profaning the Name?  If I were to purchase meat from the butcher and not pay immediately.  Another rabbi said, 'If I were to walk four paces without teffilin and without words of Torah.'"   This prohibition is repeated elsewhere in the verse, "Do not profane the Name of your Lord, I am HaShem."
The  root of the mtzvah and some details will be included in the next mitzvah.

Mitzvah 296

The command to sanctify the Name - We are commanded to sanctify the Name as it is written, "And I will be sanctified in the midst of the Children of Israel" (Leviticus 22:32).  Thsi measn that one must surrender his life to preserve the religion.  TOBM have already explained based on tradition and textual exegesis when this applies.  Even though the Torah says, "and you shall live by them" which implies that you should not die for them, they have alreasy received that this is not universally applicable.  Through the tradition we live for all matters in the Torah.  They explicitly said (Talmud Sanhedrin 74a) that three mitzvot always require martyrdom, and these include idolatry and any of it's subcategories.  This means anything that is prohibited on the strength of it's unique restrictions, as we will soon explain.  Also, sexual impropriety and subcategories, as wella as murder.  Is a person demands that he worship idols or be killed, he should be killed and not worship, even though his heart will remain treu and faithful to HaShem.  He still must die and not commit this evil act and allow the assailant ot believe that he has denied HaShem.  The Sifra says (Sifra Emor 8:6), "For this reason I took you out of Egypt, so that you will publicly sanctify My name."  The same is true for the other two - he must die and not transgress.
The root of the mitzvah - It is known that Man was only created to serve his Creator.  One who does not sacrifice his body in the service of his master is not a good servant.  Since people do give their lives for their masters we must certainly be willing to do so for the commands of the King of kings, The Holy One Blessed Be He.
From the laws of the mitzvah - TOBM said that for these three that we mentioned, a person must always give his life, whether it is a time of persecution or not, whether in public or private, whether the coercer intends to force a religious change or for his own benefit.  For other sins, however, if there is no persecution and it is in private he should transgress and not be killed, even if the intent is religious coercion.  If it is public, that is in the presence of ten Jews, if it is for the coercers benefit, he should transgress.  If it is religious coercion he should be killed.  If there is persecution, even in private and even for his benefit, even for a trivial mitzvah he should be killed. A trivial mitzvah is like what TOBM said, "even a shoe lace," which means a Jew should not wear his shoes in the idolatrous fashion, because he should not look like an idolater.  This is a subcategory of idolatry, anything that is prohibited by a unique prohibition is the field of idolatry, like that TOBM said (Talmud, Pesachim 25a), "One who is in peril may be healed by anything except for asheira wood."  The Yerushalmi said on this (Jerusalem Talmud Shabbat 14:4) that is not only if the doctor says, "bring me those asheira branches" which would then seem like deifying it.  It even applies is he says, "bring some leaves of that tree" and they can only find the asheira, martyrdom is still required.  Even though when he is healed in this case it is not truly idolatry, for he did not worship it, it is still prohibited because of the prohibition of "keep nothing of the banned in your hand" (Deuteronomy 13:18), which is a unique prohibition in the category of idolatry.  But the many restrictions that apply to idolatry that are learned from "do not place a stumAbling block before the blind" are not considered a subcategory of idolatry for the purpose of martyrdom, because that prohibition is not unique to idolatry, as it applies to every mitzvah
After I wrote this I found in some of the novellae of my teaceher (may HaShem protect him) that from the Yerushalmi (Jerusalem Talmud, Avodah Zara 2:2) it seems that if the doctor does not specify [asheira] he should transgress and not die.
The idea of murder is derived by TOBM from reason, and they said by way of parable, "What do you see that your blood id redder?  Perhaps the blood of that man is redder."  That is, the murdered might be capable of performing more mitzvot than the murderer, and therefore logic dictates that no one can kill anyone else, even if the consequence is death.  They also said, (Jerualem Talmud, Terumot 8:4) that even if there were several thousand Jews and the coercers asked for one of them, or if they should refuse, everyone will be killed, they must all be killed and not give up any Jewish life.  This only applies if they do not specify a person, but if they expressly ask for some individual they may give him over, as in the well known story of Sheva ben Bichri. This is also  the case if they ask for a woman [to rape] as we see in Terumot (Mishnah, Terumot 8:12).
The idea of sexual impropriety is derived from a connection between the betrothed maiden and murder, and just as murder demands martyrdom, so too a person must doe and not debase a betrothed maiden.  the Torah does not simply tell stories if we cannot learn from them.  They also had support from their tradition which is an iron wall for all that they say.  The early authorities wrote that we only say a person must die rather than sin, but to failing to perform a mitzvah doe not demand martyrdom, as TOBM said about Esther, that she was like still ground.  She was passive and she was raped, and even is the woman assisted in the intercourse midway, she is excused because lust overtook her, and this is the greatest coercion there is.  That we find that the ancient pious ones were killed even for the sake of a mitzvah like TOBM said (Mechilta, Shemot 20:6), "Why are you being stoned?  Because I circumcised my son.  Why are you being hanged?  Because I shook the lulav."  That was an extra measure of piety that they saw was needed in their generation.  Those great sages were qualified to make that judgment.  Otherwise they would not have been permitted to die, becasue not everyone can allow himslef to be killed for other matters than those that were specified by TOBM.  Moreover, they would be held repsonsible for the loss of their lives (Rambam, Yesodei HaTorah 5:4).
I have also seen in the works of my teacher, that any woman who can be betorhted, such as a widow to the High Priest, or a divorcee to a priest, or a mamzer to a Jew/Jewess, all these cases are not considered improprieties such that one must die for them.  Still, we would not advise anyone to have intercourse with any woman, even if she is single.  He should instead die from the illness that has come from his passion, not cohabit or even speak with her, as we see in Sanhedrin (Talmud, Sanhedrin 75a) and the Book of Madda (Rambam, Yesodei HaTorah 5:9).  More details are explained int he 8th chapter of Sanhedrin and the Peachim, Yoma and elsewhere.
The miztvah always applies to men and women.  One who transgressed and did not sanctify the Name in a circumstance where he was obligated to do so, has failed to fulfill this mitzvah, and he has also violated the prohition against profaning the Name, as I have already written (Sefer HaChinukh 295).  The sin of profaning the Name is very severe to the point that TOBM said that repentance, Yom Kippur, and afflicitons are not sufficient to atone, only death, as we see in the last chapter of Yoma (Talmud, Yoma 86a).

Mitzvah 297



Mitzvah 298



Mitzvah 299



Mitzvah 300



Mitzvah 301



Mitzvah 302



Mitzvah 303



Mitzvah 304



Mitzvah 305



Mitzvah 306



Mitzvah 307



Mitzvah 308



Mitzvah 309



Mitzvah 310



Mitzvah 311

It is forbidden to do work on the first day of the month of Tishrei as it is written, "In the Seventh month on the first day ... all hard labor you shall not do. (Lev. 23:24-25).  The seventh month is called 'Tishrei', as it is the seventh from Nissan, which is the New Year for [the count of] months.  The Sages said that this day, the first of Tishrei, is called the New Year for the count of the Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee, and we also count from it for plantings and vegetables. (Talmud, Rosh HaShanna 2a).  In the Talmud (Talmud, Rosh HaShannah 12a) the Sages explained for what purposes this is considered the New Year.  They also said there (Talmud, Rosh HaShannah 16a) that on this day the inhabitants of the world are judged for their deeds.  They explained [HaShem's] awareness of the deeds of each individual and every type as a group, that metaphorically each passes before Him in a orderly procession, that is, one at a time and not combined.
From the root of the mitzvah of this holiday: It was the kindness of HaShem with His creations that he remembers each of them and views their deeds one day each year so that the sin should not mount so greatly, and this allows for the possibility of atonement.  He is abundantly kind and skews toward kindness, and since the sins are [relatively] few, He forgives them. If there are perhaps sins that require expiation, they will be retributed in small pieces.  This is like what the Sages said, "For His loved ones he retributes in small pieces." (Talmud, Avodah Zarah 4a)  If He did not remember them for a longer period they would become so abundant that the whole world would be deserving of destruction, God forbid.
Thus this honored day is responsible for the sustaining of the world, and it is therefore appropriate to make it a holiday, a part of the count of special days in the year.  On the side that it is the day of judgement for all living things it is proper to stand in more fear on this day than the other holidays of the year.  This is the concept of 'recalling the shofar sound' that is mentioned in connection with this day, because the shofar sound is a broken sound, and it hints to the need for each person to break his evil inclination and regret his evil deeds, as I will explain at length on the mitzvah of Shofar (Sefer HaChinukh : Mitzvah 405), with HaShem's help.  It is for this reason that the Sages did not establish the recitation of Hallel on this holiday, as they said, "It is not proper for a person to sing songs of praise while he stands in judgement."  Rabbi Abahu also said in the final chapter of Rosh HaShanna (Talmud, Rosh HaShannah 32b), "The ministering angels said the HaShem, 'why do the people of Israel not say Hallel on Rosh HaShanna and Yom Kippur? et al." as you will find there.
The laws of resting on the holidays: I wrote some of them (as is my habit) in the Mitzvah of the holiday of Pesach, and it is also proper to write here some of the ideas that are mentioned in Tractate Rosh HaShanna.  They said there that there are four 'New Years' - the first on Nissan is the New Year for kings and holidays, that is, the first of the pilgrimages as explained in the Tamud (Talmud, Rosh HaShannah 4a); the first of Elul is the New Year for tithing animals; the first of Tishrei is the new year for the matters mentioned above; the first of Shevat is the New Year for trees according to Beit Shammai, though Beit Hille says that it is the fifteenth of the month.  The Talmud explains for what purposes all these New Years are pertinent.
They said there (Talmud, Rosh HaShannah 16b), that four behaviors can tear up the [bad] decree for a person: charity, crying out, changing one's name, and changing one's deeds.  The idea of changing a name seems to be that a person should think of himself as if he is someone else (Mishnah Torah, Laws of Repentance 2:4) and improve all of his ways.  Thus anytime he is called he will remember this change and pay attention to it.  They also said that three books are opened on Rosh HaShanna, one for the truly righteous, one for the truly wicked, and one for the people in between.  The idea of opening books seems to be a parable to describe the attentiveness that HaShem has to people.  The Sages always used familiar expressions to allow their ideas to penetrate the ears of the listener.  The righteous are immediately written and sealed for life. (My teacher explained that 'truly righteous' in this instance means 'totally innocent', and 'truly wicked' means 'totally guilty') [The wicked are] therefore sealed immediately for death, since they have no merits to protect them.  [The judgement of] those in between are left suspended until Yom Kippur, at which time a final verdict is sealed.  They also said (in close proximity to the preceding), "Beit Shammai said, 'there are three groups of people on the Day of Judgement (meaning after death of each person, which is called the Day of Judgement): the truly righteous, the truly wicked, and those in between.  Here they explain that 'truly righteous' and 'truly wicked' reflect the result of the judgement, which resolves any great questions about the issue.  If you merit, my son, you will be sensitive to this and my efforts will put you at ease.
They also said there that the truly righteous in judgement is sealed immediately for life in the World To Come.  Do not think that the World To Come is identical for all righteous people, for in that life there are infinite gradations, and each righteous person rises to the appropriate level based on his merits (See (Talmud, Shabbat 152a).  More details on these matters are found in the first chapter of Rosh HaShanna (and Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayyim 602 and Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayyim 603).
The prohibition of performing labor on this day applies in all places and all times, to men and women.  One who transgressed and performed labor that was not for food preparation is liable to be flogged, as we have written for the other holidays.

Mitzvah 312



Mitzvah 313

We are commanded to fast on the Tenth of Tishrei, and this is called "The Day of Atonement" as it is written, "But on the tenth of the month ... you shall afflict your souls" (Lev. 23:27)  The Sifra (Emor 7:3) explains: This refers to afflicition that causes a diminishing of the soul.  What is this?  This is eating and drinking.   The Sages similarly explained in the Talmud (Talmud, Yoma 74b): From where do we know the prohibitions against washing, annointing, wearing shoes, and marital relations on Yom Kippur?  The verse reads, 'a total rest'.  That is, form the double expression we learn that resting applies to these things as well as resting from feeding the body.
From the root of the mitzvah: It was the kindness of HaShem with His creations to establish one day to atone for their sins with repentance, as I wrote at length earlier (Sefer HaChinukh 185) on the mitvzah of the service for Yom Kippur.  We were therefore commanded to fast on this day, as food and drink, as well as other bodily pleasures, propel the physical matter toward desire and sin, and they cause people to lose the form of the wise soul that seeks truth, which is the service of HaShem and His lessons which are good and sweet for anyone with knowledge.

Mitzvah 314



Mitzvah 315



Mitzvah 316



Mitzvah 317



Mitzvah 318



Mitzvah 319



Mitzvah 320



Mitzvah 321



Mitzvah 322



Mitzvah 323



Mitzvah 324



Mitzvah 325

The commandment to sit in the Sukka - The command of the Sukka, that we were commanded to sit in the Sukka for seven days, as it is written, "In huts shall you sit for seven days" (Lev. 23:42).  The first day [of these seven] is the 15th of Tishrei.
From the root of the mitzvah: What is explicit in the verse, to recall the great miracles that HaShem performed for our forefathers in the wilderness as they left Egypt.  He covered them in the Clouds of Glory so that the sun would not harm them during the day, or the ice at night.  Some explain (Talmud, Sukka 11b) that the Israelites made physical huts in the wilderness.  Through recalling His wonders that he did for us and our forefathers we will be careful with His commandments, and we will be worthy of receiving Good from Him.  That is always His wish, to do good.
From the laws of the mitzvah: The Sages taught (Talmud, Sukkah 2a) that a Sukka that is higher than 20 cubits is invalid, and also if it is lower than 10 hand-breadths.  It must be at least 7x7 hand-breadths; less than that is invalid.  It needs three walls, and a doorway that it formed by two vertical posts and one on top of them.  The law requires that it have more shade than sun, and if it does not it is invalid.  If one makes a thick house-style roof it is valid. The law is that one may build his Sukka between trees and allow the trees to serve as walls, and one may build a Sukka on a wagon or a boat.  The law is that one may cover over a porch that has door-frames, whether they are onside or outside.  The roof must be made of something that is not susceptible to ritual impurity, such as the leftover stalks and bramble, but not from something that is susceptible to ritual impurity.  The law also considers a case where invalid cover is placed in the middle or on the side.  The law is that three [hand-breadths] of airspace invalidates the covering,  whether it is in the middle or on the side in a small Sukka.  The law is that placing a sheet over the Sukka because of the sun or below [the cover] because falling detritus invalidates it.  If they are hung for beauty it is valid, as anything that beautifies the Sukka is valid.
The law addresses a  Sukka above another Sukka, The law is that one who sleeps in a canopy in the Sukka may not do so if the roof is even one hand-breadth wide, though he may if it is less.  The law is that if one sleeps under a bed in the Sukka, if the bed is higher than ten hand-breadths he may not do so, but if it is not he may.  Even though [sleeping under] a canopy is forbidden if it less than ten hand-breadths, the bed is different because it is primarily intended to be used as a platform.  If one placed a sheet on two poles he  may sleep underneath it as it has no roof, and it is like making space by supporting it under his arms, which is obviously permitted.  The law is that a stolen Sukka is valid, as land cannot be stolen.  Even if one stole wood and made a Sukka out of them it is valid, as the Sages passed an edict that he is only repsobsible to pay for the wood.  The law is that one who is suffering is exempted from Sukka, for the Torah said 'you shall sit' [which is understood to mean] as you live.  Certainly an ill person is exempted for this reason, and even his nurses are exempted.  Similarly, anyone who is an emissary to perform a mitzvah, and also the bride-groom and his clique, as they are performing a mitzvah.  The law also addresses travelers and watchmen for gardens and orchards, and city watchmen, and rain falling, and the Sukkot of GNB"Kh and RQB"Sh, that are valid.  The law is that the wood used to build the Sukka is biblically prohibited for any other use for all seven days, and on the 8th and 9th day in the Diapsora they are forbidden because they are considered set aside.  The decorations of the Sukka are forbidden because of it would degrade the mitzvah to use them, so it is said in the name of Nachmanides (Michamot, Beitzah 4:5).  Many more details are explained in the tractate built on his which is Tractate Sukkah.  [Shulchan Arukh, Orech Hayyim 625]
The mitvah applies in all places and all times to men, but not to women.  One who transgressed and did not eat bread in the Sukkah, or he did not sleep in the Sukkah (even if it was a nap), under such conditions that he is not sick or suffering or exempt for the reasons we have said, has failed ot fulfill this positive commandment.  I already wrote above (Sefer HaChinukh : Mitzvah 6) that the court may coerce fulfillment of positive commandments.  On the first night every man is biblically obligated to eat at least an olive's worth of bread, an on the other days it is voluntary;if a man wished to eat outside of the Sukka he may do so, so long as he eats his bread meals in the Sukka.  The pious ones of old would not eat anything unless they were in the Sukka. (Talmud, Sukkah 26b)