Ein Yaakov
עין יעקב‎
archive.org: Ein Yaakov
http://archive.org/stream/agadatenyaakov01ibnh/agadatenyaakov01ibnh_djvu.txt

Chapter 1



Chapter 2

FROM what time on may we read the Sh'm'a of the evening? "From the time the priests enter to eat their Terumah until the end of the first watch," said R. Eliezer. But the other sages say "Until midnight" and Rabban Gamaliel says "Until the appearance of the morning star." It happened that the sons of Rabban Gamaliel came [very late at night] from a banquet and told Rabban Gamaliel that they had not yet read the Sh'm'a, whereupon he said to them : "If the morning star has not yet appeared you must read it." 
(Gemara) Let us see: when do the priests enter to eat the Terumah? Is it not when the stars appear ? Let then the Mishnah say: "From the time the stars appear!" In using this expression, he lets us hear something by the way; namely, that with the appearing of the stars, the priests are allowed to eat their Terumah, because the forgiveness-offering [which will be brought on the morrow] is not a hindrance, as we have been taught; "And when the sun hath set. he shall be clean. (Lev. 22:7.) i. e., the waiting for the setting of the sun prevents him from eating the Terumah, but not his forgiveness-offering." 
(lb. b) R. Jose said: "Twilight lasts as long as a twinkling ; this one comes and that one goes, and it is impossible to determine its exact time." 
(Fol. 3a) "Until the end of the first watch," said R. Eliezer. Let us see: with whom does R. Eliezer agree ? If he hold that the night is divided into three watches, then let him say "until the end of the fourth hour" ; and if he hold that the night is divided into four watches, then let him say "Until the end of the third hour?" He holds indeed that the night has three watches, but he intends to inform us that just as there exist watches in Heaven, so there exist watches here on the earth; as we are taught that R. Eliezor says: "Three watches has the night; and at the beginning of every watch the Holy One, praised be He! sits and roars like a lion, as it is said (Jer. 25:30.) "The Lord will roar from Heaven on high and from His holy dwelling shall He give forth His voice. Verily, He will roar over His habitation." And the divisions of the night arc recognized by these signs: In the first watch the ass brays; in the second the dog barks; and in the third the baby nurses from its mother's breast and the wife converses with her husband.''
How does R. Eliezer arrive at these conclusions? Does he apply the signs to the beginning or to the end of each watch ? If he applies his signs to the beginning of each watch, then it is unnecessary to have a sign for the first, as nightfall itself is a sufficient indication for it I If, however, he applies his signs to the end of each watch then the sign for the last is unnecessary, for the dawn is then sufficient! He applies his signs to the end of the first watch, the beginning of the last and the middle of the second. And if you please, you may say that he applies his signs to the end of each watch. In answer to your question as to the necessity of a sign for the last, I say : It is necessary for a man who sleeps in a dark place and does not know the time for reading the Sh'm'a : as soon as he hears the wife conversing with her husband, and the baby nursing from its mother's breast, he may begin to read the Sh'm'a. 
R. Isaac b. Samuel in the name of Rab said : "Three watches has the night and at the beginning of every watch the Holy One, praised be He ! sits and roars like a lion and says 'Woe to the children that because of their sins I have destroyed my edifice, and burned my Temple, and exiled my children among the heathens.' " 