Pesahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Two

Introduction
A pesah can be either a kid (a goat) or a lamb (a sheep) (see Exodus 12:5).  This mishnah deals with a slave who slaughters a pesah on behalf of his master, who may or not have cared whether the pesah was a kid or a lamb.  The mishnah resolves how to deal with potential confusions.

Mishnah Two
One who says to his slave, “Go out and slaughter the pesah on my behalf”, if he slaughtered a kid, he may eat it; if he slaughtered a lamb, he may eat it; if he slaughtered a kid and a lamb, he eats the first.  
If he forgot what his master told him, how should he act? 
He should slaughter a lamb and a kid and declare, “If my master told me [to slaughter] a kid, the kid is his and the lamb is mine; and if my master told me [to slaughter] a lamb, the lamb is his and the kid is mine.” 
If his master [also] forgot what he told him, both animals go to the place of burning, but they [the master and the slave] are exempt from sacrificing the second pesah.

Explanation
Section one:  In this case his master did not tell him what type of animal, a kid (a goat) or a lamb (sheep), to slaughter for his pesah.  Therefore, the slave may slaughter either of them, even though he knows that his master generally prefers one type or the other, or perhaps generally makes his pesah from a certain type and not the other.  If the slave slaughters both a kid and a lamb the first counts as the master’s pesah, whichever that one may be, and the second does not.
Section two:  In this case the master did tell him which animal to slaughter but the slave forgot.  The solution is for the slave to make stipulations when he slaughters both animals.  He slaughters them both and makes a stipulation that if the lamb is what his master wanted, then the lamb is the master’s pesah and the goat is his and vice versa.  
Section three:  In this case when the slave returns to the master it turns out that even the master has forgotten what he told his slave to do.  The stipulation will not avail because the master doesn’t know which is his and which the slave’s is.  Therefore, neither animal can be eaten; both must be burned.  However, the mishnah states that neither the slave nor the master has to offer a second pesah a month later because when the blood was sprinkled upon the altar, the master still knew which one was his (assuming that this is true).  He only forgot later when the slave returned with the two slaughtered animals.      

