Pesahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
Our mishnah deals with a case where the blood of the pesah sacrifice was sprinkled on the altar and then it became known that either the pesah had been unclean or that its owners were unclean.  

Mishnah Seven
A pesah whose blood has been sprinkled and then it became known that it was unclean, the frontlet propitiates. 
If the body of [the owner] became unclean, the frontlet does not propitiate, because they [the sages] said: [in the case of] a nazirite, and he who sacrifices the pesah-offering, the frontlet propitiates for the uncleanness of the blood, but the frontlet does not propitiate for the uncleanness of the body [of the owner]. 
If he was defiled with the uncleanness of the deep, the frontlet propitiates.

Explanation
Section one:  The frontlet was one of the pieces of clothing worn by the high priest.  In reference to this frontlet Exodus 28:38 states, “It shall be on Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron may take away any sin arising from the holy things that the Israelites consecrate.”  According to the sages, this means that if the blood of a sacrifice, in our case the pesah sacrifice, was sprinkled against the altar and afterwards it became known that it was unclean, the frontlet propitiates (makes up) for the sin and the pesah’s owners do not need to bring another pesah sacrifice.  However, this pesah cannot be eaten—only in the cases in yesterday’s mishnah can an impure pesah be eaten.
Section two: However, if the owners themselves were impure the frontlet does not propitiate for the blood having been sprinkled on the altar.  In this case the owners would be liable to bring another pesah on what is called “Pesah Sheni”—the Second Passover—on the fourteenth of the next month.  
The mishnah explains that for two types of sacrifices the frontlet does not propitiate in cases where the owner was unclean—the pesah and the nazirite offering.  The nazirite situation refers to a situation in which a nazirite completed the period of his naziriteship and brought the requisite sacrifices.  It then turns out that the nazirite was unclean, and it is forbidden for a nazirite to defile himself.  He therefore must bring a different sacrifice for having become impure during his naziriteship and then begin a new term.  
For all other sacrifices besides these two, the frontlet propitiates whether the sacrifice is unclean or the sacrifice’s owner is unclean.
Section three:  “Uncleanness of the deep” refers to someone who becomes defiled through contact with a dead body that no one knew was there.  It could be understood as “previously unknown uncleanness”—the impurity is hidden as if it was “in the deep.”  This type of impurity is an exception to the above case—if someone who brought a pesah or his nazirite offerings finds out that he had been defiled by “uncleanness of the deep” the frontlet does propitiate and the sacrifices do count.   
