Pesahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
Exodus 34:25 states, “You shall not offer the blood of My sacrifice with anything leavened.”  The sages interpret this verse to mean that the pesah cannot be sacrificed by a person who still has chametz in his possession.  Our mishnah discusses various aspects of this prohibition. 

Mishnah Four
One who slaughters the pesah with chametz [in his possession] violates a negative commandment.   
Rabbi Judah says: also the [evening] tamid.   
Rabbi Shimon says: 
[If he slaughters] the pesah [with chametz] on the fourteenth for its own purpose, he is liable; [if] for a different purpose, he is exempt.   
But [for] all other sacrifices, whether slaughtered for their own purpose or for a different purpose, he is exempt. 
[If he slaughters the pesah with chametz] on the festival for its own purpose, he is exempt; if for a different purpose, he is liable;   
But [for] all other sacrifices [slaughtered on the festival with chametz], whether for their own purpose or for another purpose, he is liable, except [in the case or] a sin-offering which he slaughtered for a different purpose.

Explanation
Section one:  The negative commandment which he violates is the one in Exodus 34:25, quoted above in the introduction. 
Section two:  Rabbi Judah extends this prohibition to include the evening tamid offered on the fourteenth of Nisan.  According to a midrash, Rabbi Judah derives this from the word “My sacrifice” in Exodus 34:25.  A tamid might be referred to by God as “My sacrifice” because it is not eaten but rather wholly burnt on the altar. Alternatively (get the pun!) he may read the word “My sacrifice” as being a plural word meaning “sacrifices”, in which case the verse reads “You shall not offer the blood of sacrifices with anything leavened.”  In any case, Rabbi Judah holds that one who sacrifices the evening tamid on the fourteenth of Nisan while in possession of chametz has violated a negative commandment.
Section three:  Rabbi Shimon makes several refinements as to when a person is liable for transgressing Exodus 34:25.  The first section deals with sacrifices made on the fourteenth of Nisan.  If he slaughters the pesah with the intent of it being a pesah he is liable (all of the below cases refer to someone in possession of chametz when making the sacrifice).  However, if he slaughters the pesah with the intent of it being a different sacrifice the pesah itself is not valid.  Since it is not a valid pesah, he has not transgressed Exodus 34:25 which refers only to slaughtering a valid pesah while in possession of chametz.  
If he slaughters a different sacrifice on the fourteenth of Nisan while owning chametz he is not liable, whether or not the sacrifice was offered with the proper intent.  Rabbi Shimon holds that the verse applies only to a valid pesah and not to other sacrifices.
The third section refers to one who slaughters an animal as a pesah sacrifice during the festival. The sacrifice is invalid since he can’t offer a pesah after the fourteenth of Nisan.  Therefore, he has not transgressed the verse.  On the other hand, if he sacrificed it with another intent, then the sacrifice is considered to be a valid well-being offering. In such a case, he is liable for making a sacrifice during Pesah while owning chametz.  Rabbi Shimon derives this from Exodus 23:18, “You shall not offer the blood of My sacrifice with anything leavened”, a verse nearly identical to Exodus 34:25.  From this verse he derives a prohibition of offering any valid sacrifice on Pesah while in possession of chametz.  
Finally, if he offers any other sacrifice during Pesah while in possession of chametz, he has transgressed, as we explained above.  This is true whether or not the sacrifice was done with the proper intent.  The only exception is a sin-offering which is disqualified if offered with the improper intent during Pesah.  Since it is a disqualified offering, he has not transgressed by slaughtering it while in possession of chametz.    
    

