Pesahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
It would have been customary for the head of a household to slaughter a pesah on behalf of the members of his household, on the assumption that they would eat it. Our mishnah deals with certain persons about whom it is unclear to which household they belong.  The problem will arise if two households slaughter a pesah on behalf of one person—from which one can they eat?

Mishnah One
A wife, when she is in her husband’s home, and her husband slaughtered on her behalf and her father slaughtered on her behalf, she must eat of her husband's. 
If she went to spend the first festival in her father's home, and her father slaughtered on her behalf and her husband slaughtered on her behalf, she may eat wherever she pleases. 
An orphan on whose behalf his guardians slaughtered may eat wherever he pleases. 
A slave of two partners may not eat of either.  
He who is half slave and half free may not eat of his master's. 

Explanation 
Section one:  A wife who is spending pesah in her husband’s home is assumed to be part of her husband’s household.  Therefore, if both her husband and her father slaughtered a pesah on her behalf, she must eat of her husband’s.
Section two:  If she went to spend the festival in her father’s house, and again both her father and husband slaughtered a pesah on her behalf, she may eat from whichever she chooses.  Since she was with her father she may even eat of his.  Nevertheless, since she is already married she may alternatively eat of her husband’s pesah. Of course, she cannot eat of both.
Section three:  If an orphan has two or more guardians, each of whom slaughtered a pesah on his behalf, he may eat from whichever he pleases.  He does not belong exclusively to any one of them.
Section four:  A master cannot slaughter a pesah for his slave if that slave is partially owned by another master. The only way to arrange this situation is for the two slave owners to jointly make one pesah.  
Section five: A half-slave, one who was owned jointly and then freed by one of the partners but not the other may not eat of his master’s pesah.  The assumption is that when the master slaughtered the pesah, he did not do so on behalf of his slave whom he owned only partially.  The master would have assumed that the slave would make his own pesah.  Therefore, this is what the half-slave must do.   

