Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Four

Introduction
The first section of this mishnah deals with eating roasted meat on the eve of the first night of Pesah.  The second section deals with lighting a lamp on the eve of Yom Kippur.

Mishnah Four
In a place where it is the custom to eat roasted [meat] on the night of Pesah, they may eat [it]; where it is the custom not to eat [it], they may not eat [it].
In a place where it is the practice to light a lamp [at home] on the night of Yom Kippur, they may light; where it is the practice not to light, they may not light. 
And they light [lamps] in synagogues, study-houses, and dark alleys, and for the sake of invalids.

Explanation 
Section one:  The Pesach sacrifice must be eaten roasted (Exodus 12:8).  After the Temple was destroyed, the some of the sages wanted to emphasize to people that it was forbidden to offer a Pesach sacrifice without a Temple.  Hence, they forbade people from eating a roasted lamb on this night.  When we learn tractate Betzah, we will see that some sages allowed the eating of a roasted lamb.  In any case, according to all of the sages, eating roasted meat was not strictly prohibited and was tied to local custom.  Those who lived in a place where they ate eat roasted meat (other than lamb) could do so, but those who lived in a place without such a custom were prohibited because it was thought that this might lead people to think that they were eating the Pesach sacrifice.
Section two:  On the eve of Shabbat and festivals it is obligatory to light a Shabbat candle. This is part of the mitzvah to enjoy Shabbat—it is more pleasurable to sit in the light than to sit in dark.  However, on Yom Kippur, when we are not commanded to enjoy ourselves, lighting a candle was not obligatory but rather tied to local custom.  Some lit candles as they did on other holidays, while others did not.  It is explained that those who did not thought that the light might lead couples to have sexual relations, which are prohibited on Yom Kippur. 
Section three:  In public places, such as synagogues and study-houses and in places that need light, such as dark alleys, they lit lamps on Yom Kippur. Those who prohibited it only prohibited within the home.  Finally, if there was a sick person who needed light for whatever reason, they of course lit one for him.  
 

