Pesahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four

Introduction 
According to Numbers 9, if a person is impure when the pesah sacrifice is offered on the fourteenth of Nisan, he receives a second chance on the fourteenth of Iyyar, the following month.  The rabbis understood this to mean that individuals could not offer and eat the pesah sacrifice while impure but that if most of the congregation of Israel was impure, or if the priests or their vessels were impure on the fourteenth of Nisan, they would in any case bring the pesah sacrifice and eat it as well.  The same is true for all sacrifices whose time is fixed—they are offered even if the people are impure.  
Our mishnah deals with five other sacrifices that are eaten by priests and that are offered even in “uncleanness” because their time is fixed.  The difference between these five and the pesah is that the pesah is not only offered when the priests or the people are unclean, it is eaten as well.

Mishnah Four
Five things [sacrifices] may come in uncleanness, but may not be eaten in uncleanness: 
the omer,   
the two loaves,   
the showbread,   
the sacrifices of the public peace-offerings,   
and the goats of new months.   
The pesah which comes in uncleanness is [also] eaten in uncleanness, for from the very beginning it came for no other purpose but to be eaten.

Explanation
Section one:  The omer, an offering of barley, is offered on the day after the first day of Pesah (Leviticus 23:10).  
Section two:  These are brought on Shavuot (see Leviticus 23:17).
Section three:  Twelve new loaves are placed on the table in the Temple every Shabbat (Leviticus 24:5).
Section four:  This refers to the two sheep which are brought on Shavuot with the two loaves (Leviticus 23:19).
Section five:  See Numbers 25:15.  The same is true for all of the goats which are brought on various holidays and are referred to in Numbers 25.  
All of these sacrifices are brought even in uncleanness but are not eaten in uncleanness because the main purpose of bringing them is not to eat them but to sacrifice them.
Section six:  In contrast, the pesah is eaten as well because the main purpose of bringing the pesah is that it should be eaten.  This is derived from Exodus 12:4 which emphasizes that the groups formed to eat the pesah are composed of the number of people who can eat one lamb.  The main point is the eating and not just the sacrificing.   



