Pesahim, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction 
This mishnah provides two lists:  one of food items which have small amounts of chametz mixed into them, and the other a list of non-food items which are made from dough.  It is forbidden to eat or to possess any of the things on this list.  However, one who does so is not subject to the full punishment of “karet” (extirpation), the punishment given for eating plain, non-mixed and edible chametz on Pesah (see Exodus 12:15).  The reason that the punishment is less is that these are either not fully chametz but rather mixtures, or if they are fully chametz they are not generally edible or considered to be food.

Mishnah One
These must be removed on Pesah: 
Babylonian kutah, Medean beer, Idumean vinegar, Egyptian zitom, 
The dyer’s pulp, cook’s dough, and the scribes’ paste.   
Rabbi Eliezer says: women’s ornaments too.   
This is the general rule: whatever is of a species of grain must be removed on Pesah. These are subject to a warning but they do not involve karet.

Explanation
Section one:  Babylonian kutah is a mixture of curds, crumbs and salt.  Medean beer (the word in Hebrew for beer just means a strong drink) has barley in it, as does Idumean vinegar and Egyptian zitom (another strong drink).  All of these things are foods which must be removed from one’s possession before Pesach because they contain in them grains which have turned into chametz.  It is curious to me that the mishnah lists only foreign products.  Indeed, these are four of the empires that ruled over Israel:  Babylonia, Medea (Persia), Edom (Rome) and Egypt.  However, Greece usually appears in this list and Egypt does not.  
Section two:  Dyer’s broth has bran in it, probably as a thickener.  Cook’s dough is dough that is used to soak up the extra, dirty liquid from cooking pots.  Scribe’s paste was used to glue parts of parchments together.  None of these three things is intended to be used as food and indeed they all probably taste terrible.  Nevertheless, since they all do have chametz in them they must be removed before Pesach.
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer adds women’s ornaments, which are made with mixtures of chametz.  The Talmud understands this as referring to various salves and not to jewelry.
Section four:  The mishnah now provides two general rules, rules which I explained in my introduction.  The first is that anything that has in it grain, even if that grain is only in a mixture with other non-grain items, must be removed from one’s possession on Pesah.  The second one is that one is not liable for karet for eating or possessing things that are not fully chametz—i.e. foods which are not in a mixture with other things.  However, they are still prohibited.

