Pesahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
In order to understand this mishnah we will first need to explain some of the terms and halakhot it mentions.  These are some technical laws concerning purity/impurity.   
The mishnah deals with a “zav” and a “zavah”—a man or woman who have had abnormal genital discharge (i.e. not semen or menstrual blood).  A man who experiences one such occurrence is impure until the evening, the same as a man who has a seminal discharge.  If he experiences two such discharges, either on the same day or on consecutive days he is now a zav (see Leviticus 15:1-12).  He is impure for seven days.  If he experiences three discharges he must also bring a sacrifice at the end of the period of his impurity, on the eighth day.  In both latter cases he cannot eat sacred food until he is pure and if necessary has brought the requisite sacrifices. 
The main difference between a zav and a zavah is that a zavah must experience her discharges on different days—two discharges on one day count as one and not as two.  Furthermore, the discharge must not come when she normally has her menstrual period.  Since this is not supposed to be her menstrual period, even blood counts as “abnormal discharge.”  Calculating when this period falls is complicated and I shall not enter into it here.  If during this period she sees discharge/blood for one day she needs not to have a discharge the following day, and then she can go to the mikveh (ritual bath).  This woman is called “observing a day for a day.”  If she has two consecutive days of discharge, on the third day she can go to the mikveh, provided that she has no discharge on that day.  However, if she has three consecutive days of discharge she becomes a “complete zavah”.  She must now wait seven days in which she does not have a discharge, on the seventh day she can go to the mikveh and on the eighth day she brings a sacrifice.  As is the case with the zav, she cannot eat sacred food until she has brought these sacrifices.  
Our mishnah teaches that one should slaughter the pesah on behalf of a person who can eat sacred food in the evening of the fifteenth of Nisan, the time when the pesah is eaten, even though on the fourteenth he/she is still unable to do so.  The only exception to this rule is someone who is impure through contact with a corpse—even if he becomes pure at night if he is impure during the day of the fourteenth they do not slaughter the pesah on his behalf.  

Mishnah Five 
If a zav saw two instances [of discharge], they slaughter [the pesah] on his behalf on his seventh [day].
If he saw three [instances of discharge], they slaughter on his behalf on his eighth [day].   
If a woman observes a “day for a day”, they slaughter on her behalf on her second day. 
If she saw [a discharge] on two days, they slaughter on her behalf on the third [day]. 
And as for a zavah, they slaughter on her behalf on the eighth [day].

Explanation
Section one:  This zav has seen only two episodes of discharge and hence he is not a “complete zav” who would have to bring a sacrifice at the end of seven days.  At the end of seven days he need only go to the mikveh.  If his seventh day falls on the fourteenth of Nisan they slaughter the pesah on his behalf because he can eat it that night.
Section two:  If he saw three instances of discharge he goes to the mikveh on the seventh day and must bring sacrifices on the eighth day.  He cannot eat sacred food until after he has brought his sacrifices.  Therefore if the eighth day falls on the fourteenth they may slaughter the pesah on his behalf.  If, however, the seventh day were to fall on the fourteenth they would not be able to slaughter the pesah for him because he could not eat it at night, before he brings the sacrifices the next day.
Section three:  This woman has experienced one episode of discharge/blood during a non-menstrual time of the month.  She may go to the mikveh the following night.  Therefore, if the second day falls on the fourteenth of Nisan, they slaughter the pesah on her behalf.
Section four:  This woman has experienced discharges for two consecutive days.  On the third day she may go to the mikveh, provided she doesn’t have a discharge on that day.  Since that evening she may eat sacred food they slaughter the pesah on her behalf.
Section five:  This woman has experienced three consecutive days of discharge and is therefore a “complete zavah.”  She must wait seven clean days (days in which she doesn’t experience discharge) and then she may go to the mikveh at night and must bring sacrifices the following day, the eighth day.  If the fourteenth falls on this, the eighth day, they may slaughter the pesah on her behalf because she will be able to eat the pesah that evening.  
