Pesahim, Chapter One, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with the time when chametz is burned.  

Mishnah Five
Rabbi Judah further said: two unfit loaves of thanksgiving used to lie on the roof of the [Temple] portico:  as long as they lay [there] all the people would eat [chametz]. 
When one was removed, they would keep it in suspense, neither eating nor burning [it]. 
When both were removed, all the people began to burn [their chametz].  
Rabban Gamaliel says: non-sacred chametz may be eaten the whole of the four [hours] and terumah the whole of the five [hours] and they burn [them] at the beginning of the sixth [hour].  

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Judah relates that in the Temple they made a sign which would let the people know until what time they could eat the chametz. They would put their two loaves of bread which were used in the thanksgiving offering (see Leviticus 7:13).  They would use only loaves which were unfit for use (for instance, the time in which they could be eaten had passed), because they wouldn’t take fit loaves and leave them there to intentionally render them inedible.  The rest is simple:  the loaves were left there until the beginning of the fourth hour, the time until which Rabbi Judah holds one can eat chametz.  When one was removed at the beginning of the fifth hour, they would cease eating their chametz, but not yet burn it. When the second was removed, they would begin to burn their chametz—at the beginning of the sixth hour.
Section two:   Rabban Gamaliel presents an opinion which lies somewhere between that of Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Judah from the previous mishnah.  Rabban Gamaliel agrees with Rabbi Judah that non-sacred chametz, i.e. chametz which was not terumah, can only be eaten through the fourth hour.  However, he holds that terumah may be eaten through the end of the fifth hour.  This is to try to prevent as much as possible the need to burn terumah, which according to halakhah should not be burnt unnecessarily.  
Rabban Gamaliel agrees that they burn all of the chametz in the sixth hour.     

