Pesahim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah relates to six practices observed by the inhabitants of Jericho—three against which the sages protested and three against which they did not.  The reason that the mishnah is here in this chapter is that the first thing that these people did is connected to the issue of work on the eve of Pesah, the main topic of our chapter.
We should note that we hear in this mishnah of groups of Jews who did not necessarily listen to the rabbis (this shouldn’t really be surprising). The rabbis protest against some of their practices, and live with other ones.  We have no idea whether the rabbis’ protests caused the people of Jericho to change their behavior.  We should always remember that when we read Mishnah we are learning how the rabbis envisioned the Jewish world to be—we are not learning what it was really like.   

Mishnah Eight
Six things the inhabitants of Jericho did: against three they [the sages] protested, and against three [they] did not protest. 
And these are those against which they did not protest: 
They grafted palm trees all day [on the eve of Pesah];   
They ‘wrapped up’ the Shema;   
And they harvested and stacked [their produce] before [the bringing of] the ‘omer.
And [for these] they did not protest.   
And these are those against which they did protest: 
They permitted [for use] the small branches [of sycamore trees] belonging to sacred property,  
And they ate the fallen fruit from beneath [trees] on Shabbat, 
and they gave pe’ah from vegetables; 
And [for these] they did protest. 

Explanation
Section one:  In this section the mishnah lists practices that the sages did not protest.
1)  Jericho is a region in which many date-trees grow.  In the spring they would graft these trees in order to improve them.  Even though they did this work all day, the sages did not protest because there is a lot of pressure to get this work done in the correct season.
2)  There are two interpretations for what it means to “wrap the Shema”.  According to one interpretation it means that they would not pause between words, and according to another interpretation they would not say “barukh shem kevod malkhuto leolam vaed” a line normally recited after the first line of the Shema.   Although one should not do either of these practices, the sages still did not feel the need to protest against them.
3)  According to the sages, the omer (first grains) are brought on the second day of Pesah.  Until this time it is forbidden to harvest the wheat (see Leviticus 23:10).  Nevertheless, the people of Jericho would harvest the wheat and stack it, before the omer was brought.  The Talmud explains that it is indeed permissible to harvest the type of wheat which grows in the Jericho region, so the sages did not protest the harvesting itself.   However, stacking the harvested wheat is prohibited and it is against the stacking that they did protest.
Section two:  In this section we learn of three practices against which the sages did protest.
1)  The people of Jericho would use the small branches of sycamore trees which had been dedicated to the Temple.  They reasoned that when these trees were dedicated by their forefathers it was only their trunks which were dedicated because people don’t usually use the branches.  This is how Rashi explains the mishnah. The Rambam explains that they would use that which grew from the tree, reasoning that when the tree was dedicated to the Temple, only the parts that existed at the time of the dedication were sanctified.  In any case, the sages felt that once the tree was sanctified none of its parts could be used.  
2)  Fruit that falls off a tree on Shabbat is muktzeh (forbidden to touch) since it could not be eaten when Shabbat began (reaping is prohibited).  The people of Jericho would eat the fruit which they found under the tree even though they didn’t know whether the fruit fell on Shabbat, in which case it is forbidden, or before Shabbat, in which case it is permitted.
3)  One is not obligated to leave the corners (pe’ah) of vegetable fields for poor people.  The problem with leaving them is that pe’ah is exempt from tithes.  When the poor people would eat these vegetables, they would eat them untithed which is prohibited.  
Against all three of these practices the sages protested.       
   
    

