Pesahim, Chapter One, Mishnah One

Introduction
As do several tractates, Pesahim begins chronologically with the events that lead up to the beginning of Pesah—namely checking the house to make sure there is no chametz on the night before Pesah.  As many of you know, this is still a custom today.  Even though most Jews have thoroughly checked their homes for chametz and removed (or put it away to be sold—no one sold their chametz in mishnaic and talmudic times) they still ritually check the home with a candle, or perhaps a flashlight, and remove any chametz found on the search.  

Mishnah One
On the evening of the fourteenth [of Nissan] they search they house for chametz by the light of a lamp.  
Every place into which chametz is not brought does not require searching, 
So why did they rule: two rows of the wine cellar [must be searched]?  [This is actually] a place into which chametz might be taken. 
Bet Shammai say: two rows over the front of the whole cellar;  
But Bet Hillel say: the two outer rows, which are the uppermost. 

Explanation
Section one:  The house is to be thoroughly searched for chametz the evening before the fourteenth of Nissan, the day on which the chametz must be destroyed.  In rabbinic times, a lamp was considered the most effective means by which to search the corners of the house, the nooks and crannies, the cracks and crevices to discover hidden chametz.  Their houses were obviously less lit than ours and they had fewer windows.  Candlelight would, at least according to the Mishnan, have been most effective.  Furthermore, at night most people are home from work and can participate in searching for the chametz.  Finally, we would do well to remember that people kept far less food in their homes and generally had far simpler material lives than we do now.  It may just be that they didn’t even need to begin cleaning at all until the evening before Pesah.  Ahh, the good old days! 
Section two:  There is no need to check places into which chametz is never or almost never brought.
Section three:   The mishnah raises a difficulty with the previous statement.  There is an older mishnah according to which two rows of the wine cellar must be searched.  We would think that the wine cellar is a place into which chametz is not brought and therefore there is no need for it to be searched.  The mishnah answers that this older mishnah refers to a cellar into which chametz actually is brought.
Section four:  In the final section of the mishnah, Bet Shammai and Bet Hillel debate how much of the wine cellar must be searched.  There are two interpretations to this debate in the Talmud.  According to the first interpretation, Bet Shammai says that they search the entire first row, from ceiling to floor and the row behind it.  Both these rows are checked from wall to wall.  According to the second interpretation, the two rows are perpendicular to each other—the top row and the row next to the entrance.  The sages also debate the interpretation of Bet Hillel.  Some explain that according to Bet Hillel they check the top two rows, whereas others hold that they check the top row and the one behind it.  

