Pesahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah continues to describe the sacrifice of the Pesah, focusing especially on the singing of Hallel by the Levites. 

Mishnah Seven
The first division [then] went out and the second entered; the second went out and the third entered. As did the first, so did the second and the third. 
They recited the Hallel.   
If they finished it, they repeated, and if they repeated [and were not finished yet], they recited it a third time, though they never did recite it a third time. 
Rabbi Judah says: the third division never reached, “I love Lord for he hears” (Psalms 116), because the people for it were few.

Explanation
Section one:  As mentioned in mishnah five, those who came to the Temple to offer the sacrifice divided into three groups.  Each group would go through the same process described in the above two mishnayot.
Section two:  While the sacrifice was being offered the Levites recited the Hallel.  We should note that this is one of the elements of the sacrificial ceremony which was eventually adopted into the seder ritual.  Indeed, all early descriptions of the sacrifice and/or seder ritual include the recitation of Psalms, i.e. the Hallel.  This includes descriptions in the Bible itself, in Josephus, Philo, the Christian Gospels and of course, in rabbinic literature.
Section three:  Sometimes the Levites would finish the Hallel before all of the lambs had been slaughtered and their blood sprinkled on the altar.  If this happened the Levites would repeat the Hallel a second and even a third time.  However, according to the tradition in this mishnah, they never had to repeat it a third time.
Rabbi Judah relates that when it came to the third division, the Levites never even got as far as Psalm 116 in reciting the Hallel.  Hallel begins at Psalms 113, so if they never even got to Psalm 116 the first time through this is indeed strong evidence that the third division was rather small.  Assumedly most people wanted to be in the first two divisions so they could get their lambs slaughtered and start digging in.  Even in ancient times people were anxious to begin their Pesah meal—some things never change.    
    
