Pesahim, Chapter Five, Mishnah Five

Introduction 
This mishnah now begins to describe how the pesah was slaughtered in the Temple.  
We should note that scholars frequently attempt to estimate how many people actually came to the Temple on Pesah and how many sacrifices were offered there.  Clearly, the numbers were impressive but even rough estimates of numbers are impossible.  Rabbinic literature, composed at least one hundred years after the destruction, is not considered by most scholars to be a particularly reliable source of history for the Second Temple period.  Nevertheless, from this mishnah we can at least detect that Pesah was the busiest time of the year at the Temple, or at least the time of the year when the most sacrifices were offered.  Similar descriptions can be found in Philo and Josephus both of whom lived and wrote while the Temple still stood.     

Mishnah Five
The pesah is slaughtered in three divisions, as it is said, “And the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall slaughter it” (Exodus 12:6):  “assembly,” “congregation,” and “Israel.”   
The first division entered, the Temple court was filled, and they closed the doors of the Temple court. 
They sounded a teki'ah, a teru'ah, and a teki'ah.   
The priests stood in rows, and in their hands were basins of silver and basins of gold, a row which was entirely of silver was of silver, and a row which was entirely of gold was of gold, they were not mixed. 
And the basins did not have flat bottoms, lest they put them down and the blood becomes congealed. 

Explanation
Section one:  Because of the large number of lambs that needed to be slaughtered on the eve of Pesah, the people of Israel were divided into three divisions each taking a turn to slaughter the Pesah.  The mishnah derives this midrashically from three terms used in the biblical verse: “assembly”, “congregation” and “Israel.”  The Talmud explains that a division could not be less than thirty people.  Assumedly, they were much larger than that. 
Section two:  Once the first group had entered they would lock the doors so that people from the second group would not push to get in.
Section three:  These are the same notes which we still make on Rosh Hashanah.  The tekiah is the single long note and the teruah is the staccato note. What we call “shevarim” (three notes) is a variant version of the “teruah”.   
Section four:  The basins were there to receive the blood after the animal was slaughtered.  The separation of gold from silver vessels was done for aesthetic purposes.  Since the blood needed to be sprinkled onto the altar, it was crucial that it not become congealed in the basins. Therefore they did not have flat bottoms.
 
