Pesahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction 
Above in mishnah nine we learned that if the pesah is taken out of the city of Jerusalem it is thereby disqualified.  Similarly, once the meat of a pesah has been brought into the house in which it is supposed to be eaten, it may not be taken out.  Our mishnah teaches what happens if part of the pesah is taken out of the city after it has already been slaughtered.  

Mishnan Twelve
If part of a limb went outside, he cuts [the flesh] as far as the bone and pares it until he reaches the joint and cuts it away. 
But in the case of [other] sanctified meat he cuts it off with a large knife, because they are not subject to the [prohibition of] breaking a bone. 
From the door-stop and within it is as the inside;  
From the door-stop and without is as outside.
The windows and the thickness of the wall are as the inside.

Explanation
Section one:  If part of the a limb goes out, he cuts away to the bone but does not cut the bone itself because it is forbidden to break the bone of a pesah.  He then pares away the meat that did not go out of either Jerusalem or the home and then they may eat that meat.  After the meat has been scraped off he cuts off the limb at the joint and then burns the rest of the limb because part of it has gone beyond its border.
Section two:  With other sacrifices that have gone beyond their permitted borders, either Jerusalem or the Temple, he need not be so cautious since there is no prohibition of breaking a bone.  Instead he may simply cut off the part that went beyond the border and the remainder may still be eaten.
Section three:  This section discusses when something is considered to have actually left the city.  The door-stop refers to the molding of the door frame against which a door stops.  If it is inside the door-stop it is still considered to be inside the house or the city.  If it is within the windows or within the thickness of the wall (for instance the thick walls of Jerusalem, or of the Temple) it is considered to be inside.  



