Pesahim, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah continues to deal with slaughtering the pesah on behalf of members of one’s family.

Mishnah Three 
If a man says to his children, “Behold, I am going to slaughter the pesah on behalf of whichever of you goes up first to Jerusalem,” as soon as the first has put his head and the greater part of his body [into Jerusalem] he has acquired his portion, and he acquires it on behalf of his brothers with him.
One may always register for it as long as there is as much as an olive’s worth for each one [registered]. 
They may register and withdraw their hands from it until it has been slaughtered; 
Rabbi Shimon says: until the blood is sprinkled.

Explanation
Section one:  A father says to his children that he is going to slaughter a pesah on behalf of the first one that gets to Jerusalem.  The idea is not that only one of them will get to eat the pesah and that the others will have to slaughter their own pesah but that the first to get to Jerusalem will merit having the pesah be “his pesah” and his siblings will join him.  The mishnah rules that the first person to get his head and majority of his body is the “owner of the pesah” and that he acquires it on behalf of the others. 
Section two:  Each person is obligated to eat an olive’s worth of the pesah sacrifice in order to fulfill his obligation.  Hence, the mishnah rules that as many people as wish to may register for any given pesah so long as there is an olive’s worth of meat for each one.  
Section three: New people may register and those who have already registered may deregister (“withdraw their hands”) until the pesah has been slaughtered.  Rabbi Shimon says that they may continue to do so until the blood of the pesah has been sprinkled on the altar.  According to a source in the Talmud Rabbi Shimon allows people only to deregister after the pesah has been slaughtered and before the blood has been sprinkled.  He agrees that one must register before it is slaughtered.     

