Pesahim, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
The final mishnah of this chapter continues to deal with cases in which a person is liable for slaughtering a pesah on Shabbat.  

Mishnah Six
If he slaughtered it for those who are not its eaters, or for those who were not registered for it, for uncircumcised or for unclean [persons], he is liable.
[If he slaughtered it] for its eaters and for those who are not its eaters, for those who are registered for it and for those who are not registered for it, for circumcised and for uncircumcised, for unclean and for clean [persons], he is exempt.   
If he slaughtered it, and it was found to possess a blemish, he is liable. 
If he slaughtered it and it was found to be an internal terefah, he is exempt.   
If he slaughtered it, and [then] it became known that its owners had withdrawn their hands from it, or that they had died, or that they had become unclean, he is not culpable, because he slaughtered it with permission.  

Explanation
Section one:  In all of these cases he slaughtered the pesah for people who could not eat it (these categories were explained above in 5:3).  Since the pesah is disqualified he is liable for having slaughtered on Shabbat.
Section two:  In these cases he slaughters the animal for a group of people, some of whom can eat it and some of whom can’t.  The pesah is valid (see above 5:3) and therefore he is exempt for having slaughtered on Shabbat.
Section three:  Certain blemishes on the animal rend the animal unfit as a sacrifice.  If he slaughters such a blemished animal on Shabbat he is liable.  He should have checked the animal before he slaughtered it to make sure it was unblemished.
Section four:  A terefah is an animal that has an injury that will cause it to die.  A terefah cannot be a valid sacrifice.  However, in this case he is exempt because the injury was internal and he had no way of knowing about it until he slaughtered the animal.
Section five:  In these cases he thought he was slaughtering it for a group of people who could eat it, but before he slaughtered it they changed their status such that they could not eat it.  Either they “withdrew their hands from it”, meaning they registered for a different pesah, or they died, or they became unclean.  In all three cases the pesah is invalid but he is nevertheless not liable because when he slaughtered it he thought he was doing so in a permitted situation.  

