Pesahim, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
A pesah that has become unclean cannot be eaten, at least not when the pesah is done in purity (see above 7:6).  Our mishnah teaches where an unclean pesah is burned.

Mishnah Eight  
If all or most of [the pesah] became unclean they burn it in front of the Birah with the wood of the pile.   
If a lesser part of it became unclean, and also “remainder”, they [the people] burn it in their courtyards or on their roofs with their own wood. 
Misers burn it in front of the Birah, in order to benefit from the wood of the pile.

Explanation
Section one:  If most or all of the pesah becomes impure it is burned in front of the “Birah.”  In the Talmud there is a debate over what the “Birah” is.  According to one opinion, it refers to a tower on the Temple mount.  According to another opinion the entire Temple is called the “Birah.”  
All sacrifices that have become impure can be burned in any place in which they may be eaten.  In our case, this would mean that the pesah could be burned anywhere in Jerusalem, since it may be eaten anywhere in Jerusalem.  The Talmud explains that forcing its owners to burn it in a very public place is a penalty placed upon them for letting there pesah become impure.  The wood they use is wood from the Temple’s wood pile, wood normally used to burn the sacrifices on the altar.  
Section two:  If only a minority portion of the pesah became unclean then its owners can burn it in his own courtyard in Jerusalem. The same is true for “remainder”—the part of the sacrifice which hasn’t been eaten within the proscribed time.  For the pesah this means that anything left by the next morning (see Exodus 12:10).   “Remainder” of all sacrifices must be burned.
In these two cases they should use their own wood to burn the unclean or leftover portion.  They may not use Temple wood within their own courtyard lest they use the wood for other purposes.  The mishnah relates that misers, those who are stingy and want to save their own wood for other purposes, would burn even a partially unclean pesah or remainder at the Birah with wood from the pile.  While this is technically allowed, it is frowned upon by the rabbis, and those who do so are awarded by our mishnah with the epitaph “misers.”  

