Chullin
חולין
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Everyone [may] slaughter and his slaughter is valid: except  a deafmute, a simpleton or a minor, so that they will not spoil the slaughter. But [if they] all slaughter and others see them, their slaughter is valid.

Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a

Mishna: One who slaughters on Shabbat or on Yom Kippur, even though he's liable for his soul, his slaughtering is Kosher.
Gamarra: Rav Huna says that Hiiya bar Rav expounded in the name of Rav, [that this slaughtered animal] is forbidden to eat on the day. The Yeshiva Bochrim in the academy came to think that this ruling of rag reflects the view of Rabbi Yehuda. Which of Rabbi Yehuda's mishnayot? It's Rabbi Yehuda about preparation. For it was taught in a mishnah that one can chop up gourds for an animal, or a carcass for a dogs. But Rabbi Yehuda says that if it wasn't a carcass as of shabbat eve, then it's forbidden...

Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b


Mishnah: In the case where one is obligated [in tithing] in bitter almonds they are exempt from sweet ones, when they are obligated in sweet ones, they are exempt from bitter ones.
Gemarra: The rabbis taught in a beraita, Almonds that are bitter and small are obligated. Big ones are exempt. Sweet ones that are big are obligated, while the small ones are exempt. Rabbi Yishmael in the name of Rabbi Yossi says in the name of his father: Both this one and that one are exempt. And some say [that he said] both this and this are obligated. Rabbi Ilai says....
Mishnah: The grape seeds that did not ferment, are not able to be redeemed with silver of tithe money, and they invalidate a mikvah. Once it ferments, it can be redeemed on silver of tithe money and does not invalidate a mikvah. Brothers that are in a partnership, when they are obligated in the Kalbon [extra bit on the shekel] they are exempt from the first born animal tithe, when they are obligated in  the first born animal tithe, then they are obligated in Kalbon.
Germara: Who is the author of our mishnah? It is not Rabbi Yehuda, nor is it the Rabbis. For it was taught in a Beraita, one who has temed and adds water in a certain quantity, and then [when removing the temed] finds it as it's [original] volume, he is exempt [from tithing], But Rabbi Yehudah obligates him [to tithe]. Who is it [the author of our mishnah] ? If it's the Rabbis, even though it fermented [they would still exempt him], if it was Rabbi Yehudah, even though it did not ferment [he would obligate in tithing].  Rabbi Nachman says in the name of Rabba Bar Avuah.