Makkoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
Mishnah eight deals with the arrival of the manslayer in the city of refuge, his acceptance there, and his eventual leaving of the city.    

Mishnah Eight
A manslayer who went to his city of his refuge and the men of that city wished to do him honor, should [refuse] by saying to them, “I am a manslayer!”. 
If they say to him, “Nevertheless” he should accept from them [the proffered honor], as it is said: “and this is the word of the manslayer.”  
They used to pay  rent to the Levites, according to the words of Rabbi Judah. 
Rabbi Meir says: “They did not pay them rent.” 
And [on his return home] he returns to the office he formerly held, according to the words of Rabbi Meir. 
Rabbi Judah says: “He does not return to the office he formerly held.”

Explanation
Section one:  Upon reaching the city of refuge the manslayer should initially attempt to refuse any honors that the people of the city may offer him.  However, if they insist he may accept.  This is learned from the verse, “and this is the word of the manslayer.”  The mishnah understands the verse as hinting that the manslayer need only speak one word of refusal of honor.  He need not refuse a second time.
Section two:  According to Numbers 35:6 the cities of refuge are actually owned by the tribe of Levi which was not apportioned a geographical inheritance in Israel as were the other tribes.  Therefore Rabbi Judah states that those who fled to the city of refuge must pay rent to the Levites.  Rabbi Meir hold that they need not.
Section three:  When he returns to his former home after the death of the high priest, Rabbi Meir holds that he returns to his former positions of power and honor.  Rabbi Judah holds that he does not.  

Questions for Further Thought:
What might be the connection between the two disputes at the end of this mishnah?  Are Rabbis Meir and Judah holding consistent opinions?  If so, what conception of manslaying underlies each of their words?  



