Makkoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Mishnayoth three continues to discuss the laws of perjuring witnesses.  

Mishnah Three
[If they say:]  “We testify that so and so is liable to a flogging of forty lashes, and they are found to be perjurers, they receive eighty lashes, because of, “You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor” (Exodus 20:13) and “You shall do to him as he schemed to do to his fellow” (Deuternomy 19:19), these are the words of Rabbi Meir.
But the sages say, “They receive only forty lashes.”
Monetary impositions are shared among the offenders, but the lashes are not shared among the offenders. 
How so? 
If they testified that he owed his friend one hundred zuz, and they were found to be perjurers, they divide the corresponding damages proportionately between them. 
But if they testified that he was liable to a flogging of forty lashes and were found to be perjurers, each one receives forty lashes.

Explanation
Section one:  This section is actually a continuation of the dispute between Rabbi Meir and the Sages begun in mishnah two.  According to Rabbi Meir one can receive eighty lashes for one false testimony, forty for violating the commandment in Exodus and forty for trying to impose forty lashes upon the accused, the violation mentioned in Deuteronomy.  According to the Sages, since this was only one act he can receive only one punishment, namely forty lashes, as he tried to impose upon the accused.
Section two:   Witnesses who perjure themselves in a monetary case are punished by a fine equal to the financial loss they tried to impose upon the accused.  In this type of case the witnesses may share the burden of the financial penalty.  For instance if they lied with regards to two hundred zuz, each witness will compensate the accused one hundred zuz.  If, however, they lied in a case involving lashes, the witnesses do not share the lashes.  Rather each witness receives the number of lashes that they attempted to impose upon the accused.   

Questions for Further Thought:
Section one:  What is the connection between the dispute in mishnah three and the dispute that we learned yesterday in mishnah two?
Section two:  Why do you think that the witnesses may share the financial penalty but not share the lashes?
