Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah One

Introduction
The final chapter of Makkoth discussed those who are liable to be flogged.  There are three reasons that a person is flogged:  1)  one who transgresses a Biblical law for which the penalty is kareth (heavenly excommunication).  According to the Rabbis one who was flogged is not penalized by kareth, considered to be a more serious punishment.  2)  One who transgresses a Biblical law which is punishable by death by the hands of Heaven.  3) One who transgresses a Biblical negative commandment, provided the transgression was active.  Our chapter lists many categories of those who are to flogged but the list is not exhaustive.

Mishnah One
And these are liable to be flogged:   
One who had relations with his sister, or his father's sister, or his mother's sister, or his wife's sister, or his brother's wife, or his father's brother's wife, or a menstruant;   
A high priest who marries a widow,  an ordinary priest who marries a divorcee  or a halutzah;
An Israelite who marries a mamzereth or natinah,  or an Israelite woman who is married to a mamzer  or a  natin.   
In the case of a [woman who is both] a divorcee and a widow [a high priest] is liable on two counts.   
But in the case of a [woman who is both] a divorcee and a halutzah, an ordinary priest is liable only on one count.

Explanation
Section one:  This mishnah lists sexual offenses which are not punishable by death.  In each of these cases both offenders, the man and the woman will be flogged.  These forbidden relations are discussed in Leviticus chapters eighteen and twenty.     
Section two:  This section lists marriages forbidden to high priests and ordinary priests.  They are listed in Leviticus 21:7, 13-15.  
Section three:  This section lists marriages forbidden to ordinary Israelites.  A mamzer or mamzereth (a female mamzer), mentioned in Deuteronomy 23:3, is one born of a forbidden union which carries with it a punishment of kareth or death.  A natin or natina (a female natin) is a descendent of the Gibeonites, those who tricked Joshua into accepting them as converts, upon which he declared them to be woodchoppers and water-drawers and forbade them to marry ordinary Israelites (Joshua 9:27).
Section four:  A widow who is also a divorcee, i.e. her first husband died and her second husband divorced her, is forbidden to a high priest on two counts.  If he were to marry such a woman he would be obligated to be flogged for each transgression, even though he did only one act.  A divorcee and a halutzah (one who has been rejected by her levir, her dead husband’s brother) are forbidden to an ordinary priest.  However, the prohibition of the halutzah to an ordinary priest is only a Rabbinic prohibition, not Biblical, as is the prohibition to a divorcee  Therefore, an ordinary priest who marries a divorcee who is also a halutzah is only flogged for one transgression.

