Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Five

Introduction
Mishnah five discusses the various prohibitions of shaving one’s head either as a sign of mourning (Leviticus 21:5, Deuteronomy 14:1) or in general (Leviticus 19:26).  These prohibitions are punishable by flogging. 

Mishnah Five
If a man makes a baldness on his head, or rounds the corner of his head, or mars the corner of his beard, or makes one cutting [in his flesh] for the dead, he is liable [to a flogging]. 
If he makes one cutting for five dead, or five cuttings for one, he is liable for each one.
On [rounding] the head [he is liable] for two corners,  one for one side and one for the other; 
On [marring] the beard [he is liable] for two [corners] on one side, for two on the other side, and for one lower down.
Rabbi Eliezer  says:  “If they were all taken off at the same time he is liable only on one count.” 
And he is only liable if he takes off with a razor; 
Rabbi Eliezer says:  “Even if he picks off the hairs with tweezers, or with pincers, he is liable.

Explanation
Section one: Making a baldness on one’s head as a sign of mourning is prohibited in Deuteronomy 14:1 and Leviticus 21:5.  Rounding the corner of one’s head and marring the corner of one’s beard are prohibited in Leviticus 19:27.  Cutting one’s flesh for the dead is prohibited in Leviticus 19:28.  All of these transgressions are punishable by flogging.  Our mishnah now proceeds to list how many violations are contained in each of these commandments.<br>Section one, clause a:  With regards to cutting one’s flesh, each cut for each dead counts as a violation.  If he cuts once for five dead he receives five sets of lashes. Likewise, if he cuts five times for one dead he receives five sets of lashes.<br>Section one, clause b: Rounding one’s head is considered two violations, one for each side of the head.  Therefore he will receive two sets of lashes.<br>Section one, clause c:  Marring the corners of one’s beard is considered five violations, two for marring each side and one for marring the chin.  Therefore he will receive five sets of lashes.   <br>Section one, clause d:  Rabbi Eliezer disagrees with the previous opinion.  In his opinion just because there are separate areas of the head to round or beard to mar does not mean that one is obligated lashes for each section.  What causes a person to receive multiple sets of lashes is his having violated the prohibition on different occasions.  If he mars one part of the beard today and another at a later time, for instance tomorrow, he will be obligated for two sets of lashes.  However, if he violates the prohibition in one sitting he is only obligated for one set of lashes.
Section two: According to the first opinion in the mishnah he is only liable for having marred his beard if he does so with a razor.  Rabbi Eliezer holds that marring even with pincers or tweezers is a violation of the commandment.


Questions for Further Thought:
Section two:  What might be the basis of Rabbi Eliezer’s disagreement with the previous opinion?

