Makkoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Mishnah continues to discuss which transgressions are punishable by flogging.

Mishnah Three
One who eats of first fruits previous to the recital over them (Deut. 26:3-10); 
Of most holy things outside of the Temple curtains (Exodus 27:9); 
Of lesser holy things or of second tithe, outside the city wall (Deut. 12:17-18).  
One who breaks a bone of a ritually clean Passover offering receives forty [lashes] (Exodus 12:46); 
But one who leaves over a clean [Passover offering] (Exodus 12:10), or breaks a bone of an unclean [Passover offering], is not given forty [lashes]. 

Explanation
Section one:  First fruits were to be brought to Jerusalem and given as a gift to the priests.  The bearer of the first fruits was supposed to recite a liturgical text contained in Deuteronomy 26:3-10, which contained a brief history of Israel (the text is now part of the Passover Haggadah).  A priest who ate of the first fruits before the recitation was made was punished by flogging.
Section two:  Certain sacrifices were only to be eaten within the curtains of the Temple.  These included sin offerings and guilt offerings.  One who ate them outside of this area was punished by flogging.
Section three:  Other sacrifices could be consumed anywhere within the walls of Jerusalem.  These included thanksgiving offerings, offerings of wellbeing and the Passover offering.  The second tithe was to be brought to Jerusalem and consumed there.  One who ate any of these things outside of the walls was punished by flogging.
Section four:  The Torah forbids breaking a bone of the Passover sacrifice.  The mishnah limits this law to a Passover sacrifice brought by a ritually clean person.  Usually unclean people could not bring the Passover sacrifice and they were to wait a month and celebrate what is called Pesach Sheni, or The Second Passover (see Numbers 9:4-13).  However, if most of the congregation was impure at the time of the first Passover (the 14th of Nissan) they were allowed to sacrifice the Passover offering while impure.  Our mishnah teaches that one who breaks a bone of a Passover offering brought while the congregation is impure is not liable to be lashed.  
The Torah also states that the Passover offering must be consumed that very night.  One who does not consume the Passover offering, while having violated a commandment, is nevertheless not flogged.  We will learn why in the next mishnah.    


Questions for Further Thought:
Why do you think a person who breaks the bone of an impure Passover offering is not to liable for flogging?

