Toharot, Chapter Three, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Today's mishnah continues to deal with cases where one drop comes out of something, becomes impure through contact with the food from which it came and then conveys uncleanness back to the food. 

Mishnah Three
A man who had corpse uncleanness who pressed olives or grapes:   
If its bulk was exactly that of an egg, the juice remains clean provided he does not touch the place on which the liquid is; 
But [if the bulk was] more than that of an egg, the juice becomes unclean, for as soon as the first drop came out, it became unclean by contact with an egg's bulk. 
If the person was a zav or a zavah [the juice] becomes unclean even if only one berry [was pressed out], for as soon as the first drop came out it became unclean by carrying.   
If a zav milked a goat, the milk becomes unclean, for as soon as the first drop comes out it becomes unclean by carrying.

Explanation
Section one: The impure person is pressing olives or grapes, and we need to know whether he conveys his impurity to the grape juice or olive oil. If the amount of juice or oil is exactly the volume of an egg, then the juice or oil remains pure, for the same reason we learned in the first two mishnayot of our chapter. Once the first drop is removed, there is less than an egg's worth of food and less than an egg's worth of food is not susceptible to impurity. However, the mishnah notes, if the person with corpse impurity touches the liquid then the liquid is impure and all subsequent drops will be impure as well.
But if there is more than an egg's worth of liquid then all of the juice (or oil) will be unclean because the first drop is defiled by contact with the impure olives or grapes. 
Section two: The difference between a zav (person with abnormal genital discharge) and a person who has corpse impurity is that a zav or zavah defiles through carrying, even if they don't touch that which they are carrying. So in this case, it doesn't matter how many berries (of grapes or olives, both are called "berries") the juice will be impure by virtue of its being carried by a zav or zavah.
Section three: Similarly, if a zav milks a goat (notice, goat and not cow) the milk will immediately be defiled even if the zav doesn't touch it because a zav conveys impurity by carrying.   
  

