Toharot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Mishnah Six
A condition of doubt in a private domain is unclean unless he says, "I did not touch the unclean thing." 
A condition of doubt in a public domain is clean unless he can say, "I did touch the unclean thing." 
What is regarded as a public domain? The paths of Bet Gilgul and similar places are regarded as a private domain in respect of the laws of Shabbat, and a public domain in respect of those of uncleanness.   
Rabbi Eliezer says: they only mentioned the paths of Bet Gilgul because they are regarded as a private domain in both respects.   
Paths that open out towards cisterns, pits, caverns or wine-presses are regarded as a private domain in respect of the laws of Shabbat and as a public domain in respect of those of uncleanness. 

Explanation
Section one: In the private domain there is a presumption of uncleanness. To override that he must be able to say with certainty that he did not touch the source of uncleanness. Similarly, in the public domain there is a presumption of cleanness. He is unclean only if he knows for certain that he touched the source of uncleanness.
Section two: The location of Bet Gilgul is uncertain. However, the Babylonian Talmud says that the paths there are narrow and sharply angled such that even a single person would have trouble running there with a pack on. 
The first opinion in our mishnah says that paths like this are considered to be private domains when it comes to Shabbat. This is relevant to the issue of carrying. We shold note that many commentators say that this is not a true private domain—rather it is what is called a "karmelit." A "karmelit" is a zone that is not public because to be a public domain for Shabbat it must truly be a public thoroughfare. However, it is not truly a private domain. 
When it comes to issues of uncleanness, the area is considered a public domain, which will also result in a leniency. We can see that this opinion is in essence lenient in both directions.
Rabbi Eliezer disagrees with the reason that the paths of Bet Gilgul were even mentioned in the earlier tradition. The earlier sages sited these paths to say that they were considered a private domain for both counts. We can see here that the background to our mishnah was some earlier halakhah that mentioned these paths. The sages and Rabbi Eliezer disagreed as to what was special about these paths.  
Section three: Paths that end on one side with a cistern, pit, cave or winepress are deemed as private domains with regard to the rules of Shabbat. However, when it comes to the rules of uncleanness, they are a public domain.  

