Toharot, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah demonstrates that the general rule that conditions of doubt in the private domain are unclean and in the public domain are clean remains stable, no matter how many doubts about the uncleanness there are. 

Mishnah Four
However many doubts and doubts about doubts that you can multiply, a condition of doubt in a private domain is unclean, and in a public domain it is deemed clean. 
How so? If a man entered an alley  and an unclean object was in the courtyard, and a doubt arose as to whether he entered or did not enter [the courtyard];   
Or if an object of uncleanness was in a house and there is doubt whether he entered or not; 
Or even if he entered, there is doubt whether the uncleanness was there or not; 
Or even if it was there, there is doubt whether it consisted of the prescribed minimum or not; 
Or even if it consisted of the prescribed minimum, there is doubt whether it was unclean or clean; 
Or even if it was unclean, there is doubt whether he touched it or not;
Any such condition of doubt is deemed unclean. 
Rabbi Eliezer says: if there is a doubt whether he entered, he is clean, but if there is a doubt whether he touched it, he is unclean.

Explanation
Section one: This is the general principle that will be illustrated in the continuation of the mishnah.
Section two: This is the first doubt—he is not sure if he even went into the courtyard, or he is not sure whether he entered the house.
Section three: This is the second level of doubt—even if he entered he is not sure if the potential source uncleanness was even there.
Section four: Third level of doubt—even if it was there, he is not sure if it was large enough to defile.
Section five: Fourth doubt—even if it was there, and it was large enough, he is not sure if it was even unclean. 
Section six: Fifth doubt—even if he went in, he is not sure if he touched it.
Section seven: In all of these cases, despite the fact that there is a multiplicity of doubts, since the doubt occurred in the private domain, he is unclean.
Section eight: Rabbi Eliezer says if he is not sure whether he even went in, then he is clean. Evidently, Rabbi Eliezer does not consider this to be a case of doubtful impurity in the private domain, because he is not sure if he even entered the private domain. However, if he knows he went in but is just not sure if he touched the source of impurity, then he is impure because this is a case of doubtful impurity in the private domain. 
 

