Toharot, Chapter Nine, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Today's mishnah is a continuation of yesterday's mishnah concerning the sheretz found among the olives. 

Mishnah Nine
If it was found on broken off pieces but it touched as much as an egg's bulk, [the entire mass] becomes unclean.   
If it was found on broken off pieces that lay upon other broken off pieces, even though it touched as much as an egg's bulk, only the place it touched becomes unclean.   
If it was found between the wall and the olives, they remain clean.   
If it was found [on olives that were lying] on the roof, [the olives in] the vat remain clean.   
If it was found in the vat, [the olives on] the roof are [also] regarded as unclean.   
If it was found burnt upon the olives, and so also in the case of a rag that was completely worn out, [the olives remain] clean, because all cases of uncleanness are determined in accordance with their appearance at the time they are found.

Explanation
Section one: In this case the sheretz is found on broken off pieces of olives that are resting on top of the olive mass. If these pieces are as much as the bulk of an egg, then they join the mass and all of the olives are impure. However, if they are smaller than the size of an egg, which means they themselves can't defile other things, then they are not considered part of the mass. 
Section two: In this case, the sheretz is found on top of pieces of olives that are themselves on tops of other pieces of olives. The mass that is underneath does not join them all together, even if they are the size of an olive. The only part that is impure is the part that touches the sheretz, for this is always impure, no matter how small it is.
Section three: In this case we find the sheretz next to the wall, not touching the olives. We don't suspect that the sheretz touched the olives.
Section four: There were some olives in the vat and then a person took some up to the roof to dry out. A sheretz is found among the olives on the roof. The olives in the vat remain pure, for we do not suspect that the sheretz was brought up to the roof with the olives.
Section five: In contrast, if it is found in the vat, we do suspect that it defiled the olives that were later taken up to the roof. Therefore, they too are impure.
Section six: As we learned in 3:5, when it comes to matters of purity, we judge according to the way in which things are found. A burnt sheretz or a completely worn out rag no longer defiles. If either of these is found on the olives, the olives are pure. We don't suspect that they were there before they were burned or became worn out.   
  
