Toharot, Chapter Two, Mishnah Two

Introduction
The rabbis decreed that a person who eats unclean food becomes unclean. In our mishnah Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua disagree with regard to his level of uncleanness. 

Mishnah Two 
Rabbi Eliezer says: he who eats food with first degree uncleanness contracts first decree uncleanness;
[He who eats food with] second [degree uncleanness  contracts] second [degree uncleanness];
With third [degree uncleanness contracts] third [degree uncleanness]. 
Rabbi Joshua says: he who eats food with first [degree] or with second [degree uncleanness contracts] second [degree uncleanness]; 
With third [degree uncleanness, he contracts] second [degree uncleanness] in regard to holy things but not in regard to terumah.   
All this applies to common food that was prepared in condition of cleanness that is appropriate for terumah.

Explanation
Section one: Rabbi Eliezer's system is simple. A person takes on the level of impurity of the food he ate. Literally, you are what you eat.
Section two: According to Rabbi Joshua, if one eats food that has either first or second degree impurity, he gets second degree impurity. This will mean that he will defile terumah. The reasoning is explained by analogy to food. Food with second degree impurity can give other food second degree impurity, if the second food is wet. The food with second degree impurity defiles the liquid, which takes on first degree impurity. The liquid can then defile the other food, giving it second degree impurity. But there are no cases where food with first degree impurity can give other food first degree impurity. Therefore, argues Rabbi Joshua, the same is true with human beings. 
According to Rabbi Joshua if he eats food with third degree impurity, he gets second degree impurity vis a vis holy things. This means he will defile holy things such as sacrifices. However, he will not defile or even invalidate terumah, because vis a vis terumah he does not have second degree impurity. 
The mishnah concludes by noting that the previous clause refers not only to terumah, meaning one who ate terumah that had third degree impurity, but even to common food that was prepared with the intent of it being eaten with the sanctity of terumah. This refers to the practice of some pious Jews, including perhaps the Pharisees, who strived to preserve the purity of all of the food that they ate, not just terumah.  

