Toharot, Chapter Five, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The final mishnah of chapter five deals with cases where witness testify as to whether a person had been defiled. 

Mishnah Nine 
If one witness says, "You have become unclean," but he says, "I have not become unclean," he is regarded as clean. 
If two witnesses say, "You have become unclean," and he says, "I have not become unclean,"
Rabbi Meir says: he is unclean.
But the sages say: he may be believed on his own evidence.   
If one witness says, "You have become unclean," and two witnesses say, "He has not become unclean," whether in a private domain or in a public domain, he is regarded as clean. 
If two witnesses say, "He has become unclean’, and one witness says, ‘"He has not become unclean," whether in a private domain or in a public domain, he is regarded as unclean. 
If one witness says, "He has become unclean," and another says, "He has not become unclean," or if one woman says, "He has become unclean’, and another woman says, "He has not become unclean," he is regarded as unclean if in the private domain, but if in a public domain he is regarded as clean.

Explanation
Section one: His own testimony outweighs that of the witness, and therefore he is considered clean. 
Section two: Rabbi Meir says that the two witnesses outweigh the person's own statement that he is pure. Two witnesses are always believed. Therefore, he must accept that he is impure.
The other sages say that since he claims to know with certainty that he is pure, he may continue to act upon his own words.
Section three: Since two witnesses say he is clean, he is not considered unclean no matter where the defilement purportedly occurred.
Section four: The opposite case: since two witnesses say he is unclean, he is considered unclean no matter where it occurred.
Section five: In this case there is contradictory testimony between two men or two women, one saying he is unclean and one saying he is clean. If this occurred in the public domain, he is clean because cases of doubtful impurity are clean in the public domain. However, if the defilement supposedly occurred in the private domain, he must be considered unclean.
Women are generally not allowed to testify in rabbinic law. However, this mishnah teaches that one woman's testimony with regard to matters of impurity is sufficient to create suspicion that he might be impure. Were the opposing witness a man, the mishnah would have said that the man's testimony outweighs her testimony. But since the opposing witness was also a woman, the person in question must be considered impure, if it occurred in the private domain. 

  
