Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Five

Introduction
A wife of a deceased husband is liable for yibbum only if her husband had a brother and no sons.  Our mishnah defines what types of brothers cause the woman to be obligated for yibbum and what types of sons exempt them.

Mishnah Five
If one has any kind of brother, [that brother] requires his brother’s wife to have yibbum, and he is his brother in every respect, except for a brother born from a female slave or a non-Jewish woman.  
If one has any kind of son, [that son] exempts his father’s wife from yibbum, and he is liable for striking or cursing [his father], and he is his son in every respect, except for the son of a female slave or a non-Jewish woman.

Explanation
Section one:  Any kind of brother, even a mamzer, requires the brother’s wife to have yibbum or halitzah.  This brother is his brother in every respect.  For instance, if his brother is a mamzer, his brother is still eligible to inherit from him.  If one brother is a priest and his brother is a mamzer, for instance his father was a priest and had an adulterous affair with a married woman and they had a child, the priest is still allowed to become impure to help bury his mamzer brother.  [Priests can only become impure for their seven immediate relatives.]  The only exception to this rule is his brother from a slave or non-Jew.  Since the child of a slave or a non-Jewish woman is not considered to be related to his father, for the child is not Jewish, the child is not considered to be related to his paternal father.
Section two:  This section basically teaches the same law with regard to a son.  Any son exempts a wife from yibbum or halitzah, even a mamzer son.  For instance, if a man had an adulterous affair and a child was born, and then the man subsequently married another woman and died without any more children, his wife is exempt from yibbum, because he already has a child.  This child is considered his in all legal matters.  For instance if he strikes or curses his father he is liable for the death penalty (see Exodus 21:15, 17).  He inherits his father, and if his father is a priest his father may become impure in order to bury him.  Again, the only exception is the son of a female slave or non-Jew, who is not considered to be related to his father.  
