Yevamoth, Chapter Sixteen, Mishnah Two

Introduction
This mishnah deals with a situation in which, while it may be assumed that a husband is dead, it cannot be assumed that his brother, the yavam is dead.
We should remind ourselves of two rules learned in the previous chapter: 1) a woman is believed when she says, “My husband is dead”; 2) a sister-in-law is not believed when she says, “Your husband is dead.”

Mishnah Two
Two sisters-in-law, one says, “My husband is dead”, and the other also says, “My husband is dead”, this one is forbidden on account of the husband of this one, and this one is forbidden on account of the husband of this one.   
If one had witnesses and the other had no witnesses, she who has the witnesses is forbidden, while she who has no witnesses is permitted.   
If the one has children and the other has no children, she who has children is permitted and she who has no children is forbidden.   
If they contracted yibbum, and the yevamim died, they are forbidden [to marry again].  
Rabbi Elazar says: since they were permitted to marry the yevamim, they are subsequently permitted to marry any man.

Explanation
Section one:  Although in this case we believe each sister-in-law when she states that her own husband is dead, neither sister-in-law is free to remarry lest the yavam, her brother-in-law is alive.  Even though each woman’s sister-in-law says that the other’s yavam is dead, sisters-in-law are not allowed to testify for one another, because they might hate each other.  Our mishnah teaches that these women are not believed vis-a-vis the other, even though they are believed vis-a-vis themselves..
Section two:  If there are witnesses that one woman’s husband has died, the other woman may remarry without fear that he is alive and she is liable for yibbum.  That is to say, she is believed with regard to her own husband, and the witnesses are believed with regard to the other husband (her yavam). However, the woman who has witnesses that her own husband died but does not have witnesses that her yavam died, cannot rely on her sister-in-law’s testimony that he died, and therefore cannot remarry.
Section three:  The woman who had children is, of course, exempt from yibbum.  The woman who did not have children is liable.  
Section four:  In this case two sisters-in-law, both of whom say, “My husband died”, have no witnesses and no children, and then have yibbum with two other brothers (not married to either of these two women).  This is permitted, as we learned in 15:1.  If afterwards, one of these brothers dies, the women may not remarry, lest the other brother-in-law still be alive, as we learned in section one.  The innovation is that even though an assumption was made that both original husbands had died, and therefore both women were permitted to have yibbum, nevertheless, we continue to fear that one of the women is lying and that the other woman’s brother-in-law is still alive.
Rabbi Elazar holds that since we made the assumption that both original husbands were dead, we cannot go back to assuming that they might be alive.  Therefore the women are permitted to marry whomever they want, without fear that they are still tied to their brothers-in-law.  
