Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Four

Introduction
Mishnah four defines the two categories mentioned in section two of mishnah three.

Mishnah Four
A “prohibition due to a commandment” [refers to] the secondary incest prohibitions forbidden by the scribes. 
“A prohibition due to holiness” [refers to the following forbidden relationships]: a widow to a high priest; a divorced woman, or one that had performed halitzah to a regular priest; a mamzereth or a netinah to an Israelite; and an Israelite woman to a natin or a mamzer.

Explanation
Section one:  Women who are not themselves forbidden because of incest laws, but the scribes (rabbis) decreed that they were nevertheless prohibited are called “secondary incest prohibitions”.  Some examples of “secondary incest prohibitions” are one’s grandmother and one’s son’s or daughter’s daughter-in-law.  The reason that the rabbis prohibited these women is to keep people away from potential sin.  That is to say, if it became permitted to have relations with your son’s daughter-in-law, you might think that relations with one’s own daughter-in-law are also prohibited.  These prohibitions are called “prohibitions due to commandments” due to the commandment to obey the words of the sages.
Section two:  “Prohibitions due to holiness” are prohibitions that are not due to incest (or adultery) but rather to the sanctity of the priests (see Leviticus 21:6-7) or the sanctity of the people of Israel.  
A widow to a high priest:  If a widow becomes liable for yibbum to a high priest, he must perform halitzah for her.  He cannot have yibbum with her because she is prohibited to him (Leviticus 21:14). 
A divorced woman or one that had performed halitzah to a regular priest:  If a previously divorced woman or a woman who had halitzath, should become liable for yibbum with a regular priest, she must perform halitzah and cannot have yibbum, since she is prohibited to him (Leviticus 21:7).
Note that this situation will usually not happen because a divorced woman or one who had halitzah cannot marry a priest, and therefore, she should not have married the yavam’s (who is a priest) brother, who is also a priest.  Nevertheless, if the brother transgressed and did marry a divorcee (marriage between a priest and a divorcee is prohibited but valid), and then died, the divorcee (who is now also a widow) has halitzah with the brother but not yibbum.
A mamzereth or a netinah to an Israelite and an Israelite woman to a natin or a mamzer:  A mamzer (or mamzereth, a female mamzer) is the child of a forbidden union (Deuteronomy 23:3.  The definition of a mamzer appears in chapter 4:13).  A natin (or a netinah, a female natin) is a descendent of a tribe of foreigners who converted through trickery in the days of Joshua and were declared temple slaves (Joshua 9:27).  Neither of these categories of men or women can marry full Israelites.  Therefore, if one of these people becomes liable to have yibbum with an Israelite, or if an Israelite becomes liable to have yibbum with one of them, they have halitzah and not yibbum.   
