Yevamoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
This mishnah continues to the discuss the situation of two brothers married to two sisters and a third brother married to a woman who is not a sister.

Mishnah Seven
Three brothers:  two of whom were married to two sisters and the third was married to a stranger:  If one of the sisters’ husband died and the brother who was married to the stranger married his wife, and then the wife of the second brother died, and afterwards the brother who was married to the stranger died, behold she is forbidden to him forever, since she was forbidden to him for one moment.  
Three brothers:  two of whom were married to two sisters and the third was married to a stranger.  If one of the sisters’ husbands divorced his wife, and then the brother who was married to the stranger died, and he who had divorced his wife married her and then died,- this is a case concerning which they said:  If any of them died or were divorced, their rivals are permitted.

Explanation
Section one:   Reuven and Shimon are married to Rachel and Leah and Levi is married to Tovah.  Reuven dies and Levi has yibbum with Rachel, and then Leah dies and then Levi dies (sounds a bit like a Shakespeare tragedy, doesn’t it!).  In this case both Tovah and Rachel should become liable to have yibbum or halitzah with Shimon.  Note that this is the second time that Rachel has become potentially liable for yibbum with Shimon, the first time when Reuven died and now when her current husband, Levi died.  Our mishnah teaches that since she was exempt from yibbum with Shimon the first time, for at the moment he was married to her sister, she is exempt from yibbum the second time, even though Leah, her sister, is no longer alive.  The fact that she was once forbidden to have yibbum with Shimon, means that she will always be forbidden to have yibbum with him.  Tovah is also exempt because she is the rival wife of a woman exempt from yibbum.
Section two:  Again, Reuven and Shimon are married to Rachel and Leah and Levi is married to Tovah.  Reuven divorces Rachel, and then Levi dies, and Reuven has yibbum with Tovah, and then he dies.  At this point Tovah becomes liable for yibbum with Shimon.  The mishnah teaches that Tovah can have yibbum with Shimon even though Reuven was once married to the sister of Shimon’s wife.  In other words, if Rachel had still been married to Reuven she would have been exempt from yibbum, and Tovah would have been exempt from yibbum, and hence forbidden to have yibbum (anyone exempt from yibbum may not have yibbum).  Now that Rachel is no longer married to Reuven, Tovah can have yibbum.  The mishnah refers to this law which has already been stated in chapter one, mishnah one.    
