Yevamoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three

Introduction
In order to understand this mishnah, we must understand some background laws concerning a woman’s ownership of property, her dowry and her ketubah.
When a man marries a husband he writes her a ketubah (a marriage document).  In the ketubah is written the amount of money he will pay her upon divorce or his death.  Additionally, some of the dowry that the woman brings into the marriage is written in the ketubah.
Dowry can come in two forms.  The first form is called “pluckable property” (nikhse melog).  This is money that she brings from her father’s house that remain hers and the husband may not use.  The husband has rights to the profit earned from this money during the marriage.  He has no responsibility for the money.  For instance, if she brings in a piece of land, the land is hers but the husband may use the fruits of the land.  If the land should be taken by the Romans, he is not responsible to pay his wife the value of the land.  Money that she receives as a gift or as an inheritance is part of this category.  
The second form is “property of iron sheep” (nikhse tzon barzel).  This is written in the ketubah and hence the husband has responsibility for it, should the property be lost, stolen or destroyed.  The husband may use the property.  His sole responsibility is to return the value of the original property upon death or divorce.
A wife may not sell either of these types of property without her husband’s permission.  Neither may a husband sell the first type of dowry without his wife’s permission, since it is still hers.  He may however sell “property of iron sheep”.  
Our mishnah discusses the status of the shomeret yavam, a widow who is waiting for her yavam to do yibbum or halitzah.

Mishnah Three
If a shomeret yavam came into possession of money:
Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel agree that she may sell it or give it away, and that her act is legally valid. 
If she dies, what shall be done with her ketubah and with property that comes in and goes out with her?   
Beth Shammai says: the heirs of her husband are to share it with the heirs of her father;   
Beth Hillel says: the property is to remain with those in whose possession it is, the ketubah is to remain in the possession of the heirs of the husband and the property which comes in and goes out with her remains in the possession of the heirs of her father.   

Explanation
Section one:  Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel agree that a shomereth yavam can sell new property that has come into her hands since the death of her first husband.  She does not need the permission of the yavam, because he has not married her.  
Section two:  If she dies, there is a dispute between the two houses concerning her inheritance.  Usually a husband inherits his wife, but in this case she only had a yavam who had not yet performed yibbum.  He is not fully her husband.  
Beth Shammai holds that the heirs of her husband, meaning the yavam who inherits from his dead brother, splits the money with the heirs of her father.  The heirs of the father inherit since an unmarried woman is inherited by her father.
Beth Hillel does not split the money evenly.  Rather, each part of the inheritance remains where it is presumed to be.  Since the ketubah, meaning the money paid from the husband to the wife upon death or divorce, is still with the husband’s estate, the husband’s inheritors collect this money.  Additionally, the “property of iron sheep” is in her husband’s possession since he has full ownership over it.  Therefore, the husband’s owners collect this as well.  [This is Albeck’s explanation.  The talmud explains that “property of iron sheep” is split between the husband’s and father’s inheritors.]
The “pluckable property” is in the wife’s possession, since the husband cannot sell it.  Therefore the wife’s father’s inheritors inherit this property.    
