Yevamoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah teaches that any intercourse counts as an act yibbum.

Mishnah One
One who has intercourse with his yevamah, 
whether in error or with presumption, 
whether under compulsion or of his own free will, 
even if he acted in error and she in presumption, 
or he in presumption and she in error, 
or he under compulsion and she not under compulsion, 
or she under compulsion and he not under compulsion, 
whether he only began to have intercourse or he completed having intercourse, 
he has acquired her as a wife.  
The laws do not make a distinction between different types of intercourse.  

Explanation
Whether in error or with presumption:  In error means that he did not know that she was his yevamah. With presumption means that he did not intend to fulfill the mitzvah of yibbum, but rather just to have intercourse with her for the sake of pleasure. 
Whether under compulsion or of his own free will:  Under compulsion means that someone forced him to have relations with the yevamah.  Of his own free will means that he intended to fulfill the mitzvah.
Even if he acted in error and she in presumption:  He did not know that she was the yevamah, but she knew that he was the yavam but she did not intend to fulfill the mitzvah. 
Or he in presumption and she in error:  He did not intend to fulfill the mitzah and she did not know who he was.
Or he under compulsion and she not under compulsion:  He was forced and she intended to fulfill the mitzvah.   
Or she under compulsion and he not under compulsion:  She was forced but he was not.  The same is true if both were forced, or both were presumptuous.  The intercourse always counts.  
Whether he only began to have intercourse or he completed having intercourse:  It does not matter if they complete having intercourse (assumedly referring to ejaculation).  
The laws do not make a distinction between different types of intercourse.  According to the talmud, this means that even “non-natural” intercourse (anal sex) counts as intercourse for the sake of yibbum.  
In all of these cases, the mere act of intercourse means that he has acquired her as a wife.    

