Yevamoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Five

Introduction
This mishnah discusses the performance of yibbum or halitzah by a eunuch or by an aylonit, a woman who has not developed signs of sexual maturity, and therefore by definition cannot procreate.  Both of these categories are therefore people who cannot procreate.  Since they cannot procreate they are excluded from the laws of halitzah and yibbum, as we learned in the previous mishnah.  

Mishnah Five
The eunuch neither performs halitzah nor contracts yibbum.
So too a woman who is incapable of procreation neither performs halizah nor is taken in yibbum.
If a eunuch performed halitzah for his yevamah, he does not disqualify her [from subsequently marrying a priest].   
If he has intercourse with her he disqualifies her, since this is an act of fornication.   
Similarly where brothers performed halitzah for a woman incapable of procreation, they do not disqualify her [from marrying a priest].   
If they have intercourse with her they do disqualify her, since this is an act of fornication.

Explanation
Section one:  We have already seen this halakhah in the previous mishnah.  Here it either refers to a man-made eunuch, who according to Rabbi Akiva does not perform halitzah.  Alternatively, it refers to all eunuchs and this mishnah contains an opinion that disagrees with both opinions in the previous mishnah.
Section two:  A woman who is physically incapable of procreating is not subject to the laws of halitzah or yibbum.  Since the point of yibbum is procreation, those who cannot procreate are exempt.  
Section three:  Since a eunuch does not perform halitzah, there is no validity to an act of halitzah that he performs.  If he nevertheless does so, he has not thereby disqualified the woman from subsequently marrying a priest.  [A halutzah is forbidden to be married by a priest].  
However, if he has intercourse with her, as an attempted act of yibbum, he has disqualified her from marrying a priest, because this was forbidden.  Since she was not liable for yibbum, she is prohibited to him by the prohibition of being his brother’s wife.  [Remember any time yibbum is not necessary, the prohibition of a brother’s wife is effective, even after the brother’s death].  Any woman who has had relations with a man forbidden to her is subsequently prohibited from marrying a priest.  
Section four:  This section contains nearly the same laws with regard to the woman who cannot procreate.  If one of the brothers performs halitzah he has not disqualified her from marrying a priest.  However, if one of them tries to have yibbum with her, she is disqualified, because she was prohibited to him, as his brother’s wife.  
