Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
The second part of mishnah eight dealt with men who are suspected of having relations with women prohibited to them.  Mishnah nine deals with men who are suspected of lying in order to free a woman of her husband so that they could marry her.

Mishnah Nine
A man who brings a bill of divorce from a country beyond the sea and states, “it was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence”, must not marry the [divorcer’s] wife.   
[Similarly, if one states] “he died”, “I killed him”, or “We killed him”, he must not marry his wife. 
Rabbi Judah said: [If he says], “ I killed him”, the woman may not marry [any one]; [If, he states], “We killed him”, the woman may marry.

Explanation
Section one:  A messenger who brings a bill of divorce from overseas must state “It was written in my presence and signed in my presence”.  This is to ensure that the divorce document was done properly and that the husband actually requested that it be given (we will learn these laws in tractate Gittin).  Our mishnah teaches that the messenger is not allowed to marry the divorcer’s wife, lest the messenger fake the get in order to marry her.  His participation in “freeing” her of her husband, disqualifies him from subsequently marrying her.
Section two:  Similarly, if a man testifies that a woman’s husband is dead, he may not marry her.  Jewish law generally does not allow testimony with less than two witnesses.  However, in the case of testimony about the death of a man, testimony that will allow her to remarry as a widow, only one witness is required.  Since this man is our sole means of knowing that she is a widow, he cannot marry her, lest he lie in order to marry her.  Even if he says “I killed him” or “We killed him” he cannot marry her.  
Section three:  A murderer is forbidden from testifying in a court of law.  Therefore, according to Rabbi Judah, if one testifies that he murdered a woman’s husband, his testimony is disqualified and it turns out that there is no testimony to her husband’s death.  Therefore, she cannot remarry.  However, if he says, “We killed him” he may mean to say, “I was there when other people killed him”.  Since he does not definitively say that he is a murderer, his testimony about the death of the woman’s husband is valid, and she may remarry.  
