Yevamoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Three

Introduction
Our mishnah teaches when the daughter of a priest who is married to someone forbidden to her, loses the right to eat terumah, which is reserved only for priests and their families.

Mishnah Three 
A widow to a high priest, a divorced woman or a halutzah to an ordinary priest—they do not eat terumah from the point of betrothal.   
Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon declare them eligible.
If they became widows or were divorced after full marriage they are ineligible;   
If after betrothal they are eligible.  

Explanation
Section one:  There are three laws which must be explained before we can understand this mishnah.  First of all it is forbidden for a widow to marry a high priest and for a divorcee or a halutzah to marry an ordinary priest.  If they do, the women lose the right to eat terumah, both as wives of the priest and as daughters of priestly fathers.  Second of all, an unmarried daughter of a priest continues to eat terumah until she is married.  Once she is married, should she be widowed or divorced without children she returns to eating terumah.  If she was married to a non-kohen and she had children, when divorced or widowed she does not eat terumah.  Third of all, a woman who has relations with someone who is forbidden to her can no longer eat terumah.
According to the first opinion in the mishnah, as soon as the woman is betrothed to someone to whom she is forbidden, she loses her right to eat terumah.  Although she is only betrothed, and has not had sexual intercourse, she already loses the right to eat terumah.  According to Rabbis Elazar and Shimon, she only loses that right when she actually marries the kohen, to whom she is forbidden.  At the point of marriage the women become what is known as halalot, or profaned women, who may not eat terumah.
Section two:  If they were married and then divorced or widowed, all the sages agree that they do not return to their father’s domain to eat terumah.  Since they were married to someone to whom they are forbidden, they lose this right forever.  However, if they were divorced or widowed from betrothal, then they may return and eat terumah.  In this case even the sages who held the first opinion of section one hold that they may eat terumah.  They were forbidden to eat terumah when they were betrothed women, waiting to be married to men forbidden to them.  Now that they will surely not marry these men, they may return to their father’s home to eat terumah.  
