Yevamoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Six

Introduction
Since the previous mishnah mentioned the aylonit, who cannot have children, our mishnah discusses the obligation of procreation.

Mishnah Six
A man shall not abstain from procreation unless he already has children.
Beth Shammai says: two males, 
And Beth Hillel says: male and a female, for it says, “Male and female created he them” (Genesis 5:2).  
If a man married a woman and lived with her for ten years and she bore no child, he may not abstain [any longer from the duty of propagation].  
If he divorced her she is permitted to marry another, and the second husband may also live with her for ten years.  
If she miscarried [the period of ten years] is counted from the time of her miscarriage.
A man is commanded concerning the duty of propagation but not a woman. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Beroka says: Concerning both of them it is said, “And God blessed them; and said to them… “Be fruitful and multiply” (Genesis 1:28).

Explanation
Section one:  The point that this line in the mishnah is trying to make can be read in two subtly different ways.  It may be that the point of the line is to teach that there is an obligation to procreate.  In other words, without this directive people may have thought (and in ancient Judaism some sects did think) that God preferred people to be celibate and to forego children.  Judaism teaches the opposite.  Sexual relations are generally viewed in a positive light and having children is positive commandment.  
The other way to read the line, is that it is taken for granted that a person is obligated to procreate.  The innovation of our mishnah is that a man does not need to keep on having children as long as possible.  Once he has had two children, he may desist from procreation.  Understanding the line this way, we would have a different view of the mishnah.  Although it is still considered a commandment to procreate, a person might fulfill that mitzah with only two children and then devote his life to other things, such as the study of Torah.  We should note that in any case, the Talmud teaches that even if a man has children he should remain married for marriage is a preferred state.
Beth Shammai holds that a person needs two male children to have fulfilled the requirement.  In the Talmud this is learned from a precedent set by Moses, who had two children and then separated from his wife (according to a midrash).
From the story of the creation, where man and woman were created together, Beth Hillel learns that a person needs both a male and a female child to have fulfilled the mitzvah.  
Section two:   This section presents a halakhic ramification to the fact that Jews are commanded to procreate.  If a man is married to a woman and for ten years they do not succeed in having children, he must either marry another wife or divorce the first wife and marry another wife.  When bigamy was prohibited, only the second option remained.  Note that the mishnah is rather lenient.  Ten years is a long time to attempt to have children.  The mishnah gives the couple the benefit of the doubt.  Furthermore, the woman who could not succeed in having children with one man, is allowed to remarry.  We might have thought that there would be an assumption of infertility.  The mishnah fully realizes that the infertility might have been a problem with the man.  Finally, if she has a miscarriage, the ten years begin to be counted again.  Although the child was not even born, we have seen that the woman can get pregnant and that perhaps she will someday be able to have a viable child.  
I should also note, that although this halakhah is still on the books, it is not observed.  Even ultraorthodox couples do not divorce if they don’t succeed in having children.  The halakhah is simply ignored.
Section three:  According to the first opinion, only men are obligated to procreate.  Rabbi Yohanan ben Baroka says that both men and women are obligated equally.  We should note that although the first opinion sounds very chauvinistic, and it somewhat is, not being obligated to have children does free a woman to be more in control over her own reproductive process.  Certainly the laws of birth control are more lenient if she is not obligated to have children. 
There is some excellent secondary literature on this issue.  Judith Hauptman has a chapter on the topic in her book, “Rereading the Rabbis”.  David Feldman’s book, “Birth Control in Jewish Law” also discusses the topic.  
