Yevamoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah Four

Introduction
This mishnah contains a discussion about whether or not a eunuch is obligated to perform halitzah for his dead brother’s wife and whether or not halitzah is performed for his wife, should he die without children.  Note that this issue is tied to the eunuch’s ability or lack thereof to have children.  One who cannot have children would be less likely to be subject to the laws of halitzah and yibbum whose purpose is to supply children for the dead brother. 

Mishnah Four
Rabbi Joshua said:  I have heard that a eunuch performs halitzah and that halitzah is performed by others for his wife, and also that a eunuch does not perform halitzah and that no halitzah is performed for his wife, and I am unable to explain this.  
Rabbi Akiva said:  I will explain it: a man-made eunuch performs halitzah and halitzah is also performed for his wife, because there was a time when he was fit [to have children]. A eunuch by nature neither performs halitzah nor is halitzah performed for his wife, since there never was a time when he was fit. 
Rabbi Eliezer said: Not so!  Rather a eunuch by nature performs halitzah and halitzah is performed for his wife, because he may be cured. A man-made eunuch neither performs halitzah nor is halitzah performed for his wife, since he cannot be cured. 
Rabbi Joshua ben Baterra testified concerning Ben Megusat, who was a man-made eunuch living in Jerusalem and they performed yibbum for his wife, thus confirming the opinion of Rabbi Akiva.

Explanation
Section one:  Rabbi Joshua transmits an old halakhah that he has heard, but that he doesn’t know how to explain. In these words we can see how halakhot were often transmitted in pithy, memorable phrases, such that later sages sometimes did not know how to explain them.  
Rabbi Joshua has heard that eunuchs are subject to the laws of halitzah and he has also heard the opposite.  He does not know if these two halakhot apply to two different types of eunuchs or whether they contradict each other.
Section two:  Rabbi Akiva explains the puzzle brought up by Rabbi Joshua.  The eunuch who was castrated by humans performs halitzah for his dead brother’s wife.  [He cannot have yibbum, because he is forbidden to marry Israelites, as we learned above.]  If he should die without children, halitzah or yibbum is performed for his wife.  The reason that he is subject to the laws of yibbum is that he was at one time not a eunuch and he was fit to have children.  In contrast, the eunuch who was born a eunuch was never fit to have children, and therefore is not subject to the laws of halitzah.  Should he die, his wife is exempt from both halitzah and yibbum.  Should his brother die, he does not perform halitzah for his widow.
Section three:  Rabbi Eliezer offers the opposite reading and solution to the tradition transmitted by Rabbi Joshua.  The eunuch who is subject to the laws of halitzah and yibbum is one who was born a eunuch, since he could potentially be cured, and then he could have children.  A eunuch who was castrated by others cannot be cured (even today this is not a simple procedure).  Therefore, he is not subject to the laws of halitzah and yibbum.  
Section four:  Rabbi Joshua ben Batera testifies about a man-made eunuch, that they performed yibbum for his wife.  This proves what Rabbi Akiva said, that man-made eunuchs are subject to the laws of halitzah and yibbum.  Note that what proves that Rabbi Akiva is correct is a precedent, and not any inherent logic to his words.  
