Yevamoth, Chapter Eight, Mishnah One

Introduction
This mishnah discusses the right of priests, their wives and their slaves to eat terumah if the priests have physical defects that might disqualify them from the priesthood.  

Mishnah One
An uncircumcised [priest] and all impure persons may not eat terumah. 
Their wives and slaves may eat terumah.   
[A priest] whose testes are crushed or whose member is cut off, as well as their slaves, may eat terumah, but their wives may not.   
If, however, he did not know her after the his testes were crushed or his member was cut off, the wives may eat [terumah].

Explanation
Section one:  An uncircumcised priest may not eat terumah.  In the Talmud this is derived through an analogy with the passover sacrifice, which also may not be eaten by anyone who is uncircumcised (Exodus 12:44-48).  
Impure persons may not eat terumah. This refers to someone who is ritually impure, through anything that ritually defiles, such as scale disease, gonorrhea etc.  This halakhah is stated explicitly in Leviticus 22:4-6.  
However, the wife and slaves of an uncircumcised priest and an impure person may eat terumah.  This means that these men are priests, but that they themselves are disqualified from eating terumah due to their lack of circumcision or purity.  This lack does not effect their household.
Section two:  According to Deuteronomy 23:2, a man whose testes are crushed or whose member (penis) is cut off, may not enter into the assembly of God.  This is understood to mean that they may not marry an Israelite woman.  Our mishnah discusses a priest who has one of these physical defects.  He may continue to eat terumah, as may his slaves, since he is a priest. However, his wife may not eat terumah since he was not allowed to marry her or have intercourse with her.  We have already learned that once a woman has intercourse with someone forbidden to her she loses the right to eat terumah.
However, if one of these physical defects occurred to him while he was married to her, and he does not continue to know (have intercourse) her afterwards, she may continue to eat terumah.  The only reason that she loses her right to eat terumah is that she was disqualified by intercourse with someone forbidden to her.  However, without such intercourse, she remains the wife of a priest and can continue to eat terumah.  
