Yevamoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Three

Introduction
This mishnah gives some general principles for when a woman is liable for yibbum (or halitzah) and when she is forbidden/exempt.

Mishnah Three
A general rule has been said about the yavamah:   
Wherever she is prohibited as a forbidden relation, she may neither perform halitzah nor have yibbum. 
If her prohibition is due to a commandment or a prohibition due to holiness, she must perform halitzah but she may not have yibbum. 
If her sister is also her sister-in-law, she may perform halitzah or have yibbum.

Explanation
Section one:  This general rule has been amply illustrated in the previous chapter and a half.  If the yavamah was prohibited to her yavam according to the biblical laws of incest, she may not perform halitzah nor have yibbum.  Indeed, she is not truly subject to the laws of yibbum, since the prohibition of incest “trumps” the obligation of yibbum. 
Section two:  This section mentions two lesser prohibitions, the “prohibition due to a commandment” and a “prohibition due to holiness.  Tomorrow’s mishnah will explain what both of these categories are.  Suffice it now to say that they are less consequential than the biblical incest prohibitions mentioned in the previous section.  If a woman who is prohibited to her yavam in one of these ways should be liable for yibbum, she must perform halitzah but may not have yibbum.  This is another way of stating that she is biblically liable for yibbum, but to avoid the problems that this type of yibbum would cause, the only option is halitzah.
Section three:  If the sister of the prohibited woman is also her sister-in-law, meaning there is a situation in which two sisters married to two brothers, and then both brothers die and both women become liable for yibbum to a third brother, even though this brother is prohibited from one of the sisters, he can have yibbum or halitzah with the other.  I will illustrate this complicated situation using names.  Reuven, Shimon and Levi are brothers.  Leah and Rachel are sisters.  Leah marries Reuven and Shimon marries Rachel, and then both men die without children.  Levi is married to Rachel’s daughter (from a marriage before she married Shimon).  Levi can therefore not have yibbum with Rachel, since a man cannot marry a woman and her daughter.  Nevertheless, Levi can have yibbum with Leah.  Although in general a man cannot have yibbum with the sister of his yavamah (we will learn this in chapter three), in this case since Rachel was forbidden to him, she was never his yavamah.  Therefore, Leah is permitted.       
