Avoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Seventeen

Introduction
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah was one of the rabbis at Yavneh, after the destruction of the Temple.  When Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as patriarch, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah took his place. 
In this mishnah there are really two totally separate mishnayoth.  I have explained and numbered each individually.   

Mishnah Seventeen, Part One
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah said: 
Where there is no Torah, there is no right conduct;    
where there is no right conduct, there is no Torah.    
Where there is no wisdom there is no fear of God; 
where there is no fear of God, there is no wisdom.    
Where there is no understanding, there is no knowledge;    
where there is no knowledge, there is no understanding. 
Where there is no bread, there is no Torah;    
where there is no, Torah there is no bread. 

Explanation—Part One
In this mishnah Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah gives a list of qualities that cannot exist one without the other.  
Section one:  One who is not learned, cannot truly act in a proper manner.  As Rabbi Jonah commented, “one who does not know the Torah cannot be perfect in his ethical conduct because most of the highest ethical principles are to be found in the Torah”.  These are things such as the giving of charity, having just weights and measures and many other commandments of this nature.  However, without righteous conduct, a person cannot truly succeed in learning Torah.  This is perhaps the more surprising element in this statement.  That a rabbi should say that one could not act in a proper manner without Torah is not surprising.  To learn that proper manner is essential for the study of Torah is more innovative.  One who acts improperly while studying Torah is not only engaging in improper behavior, but he also will not in the end succeed in being learned.
Section two:  One who is not wise enough to at least think about the nature of God, will not be able to truly fear God.  Even though he may wish to fear God, his lack of understanding will impede the depth of such fear.  The opposite is also true.  One who does not fear God enough to understand that wisdom is not a goal in and of itself, cannot truly be wise.
Section three:  According to one interpretation of this statement, what a person learns from his teacher is called knowledge and what he perceives with his own mind is called understanding.  In order to be a fully balanced learned person, he must have both qualities.  He must be able to listen to what his teachers tell him and commit it to his memory.  He also must be able to generate his own understanding; he must learn to be an independent thinking human being.
Section four:  This is one of the more famous sayings in Avoth.  If a person does not have sustenance, if he is always hungry, he will not be able to learn Torah.  Therefore a person should engage in a profession to be able to financially sustain himself while he is studying Torah.   This is the more practical aspect of this statement.  The more surprising aspect is that without Torah, there is no bread.  This means that without spiritual sustenance, the physical sustenance is useless.

Mishnah Seventeen, Part Two   
He used to say: one whose wisdom exceeds his deeds, to what may he be compared?
To a tree whose branches are numerous but whose roots are few, so that when the wind comes, it uproots it and overturns it, as it is said, “He shall be like a bush in the desert, which does not sense the coming of good.  It is set in the scorched places of the wilderness, in a barren land without inhabitant” (Jeremiah 17:6).    
But one whose deeds exceed his wisdom, to what may he be compared? 
To a tree whose branches are few but roots are many, so that even if all the winds in the world come and blow upon it, they cannot move it out of its place, as it is said, “He shall be like a tree planted by waters, sending forth its roots by a stream.  It does not sense the coming of heat, its leaves are ever fresh.  It has no care in a year of drought; it does not cease to yield fruit” (ibid, 17:8).

Explanation--Part two
In the metaphor used in this mishnah, the performance of commandments is likened to roots that anchor a person in this world.  Wisdom and knowledge of Torah are likened to branches that reach upwards toward the sky.  One who has a lot of wisdom but does not perform the commandments can easily be knocked over.  Evil influences will corrupt him and lead him astray.  However, one who has many good deeds will stand up even in the most difficult circumstances.  He is like a person who builds a wall with large stones on the bottom and fancy bricks on the top.  A person might knock over the bricks but the wall will nevertheless continue to stand.  Good deeds anchor a person in this world and give him a firm base from which to build.  This is another saying in Avoth which shows that Judaism is first and foremost a religion of deed.  This is not to say that beliefs are not also important, but that the basis of Judaism is the performance of the commandments.   
