Avoth, Chapter Six, Mishnah Four


Mishnah Four
Such is the way [of a life] of Torah:  you shall eat bread with salt, and rationed water shall you drink; you shall sleep on the ground, your life will be one of privation, and in Torah shall you labor.   
If you do this, “Happy shall you be and it shall be good for you” (Psalms 128:2):   “Happy shall you be” in this world, “and it shall be good for you” in the world to come.
Do not seek greatness for yourself, and do not covet honor.  
Practice more than you learn.  
Do not yearn for the table of kings, for your table is greater than their table, and your crown is greater than their crown, and faithful is your employer to pay you the reward of your labor.

Explanation
Section one:  This mishnah teaches the way of life of one who is totally dedicated to the study of Torah, so much so that he neglects his worldly, material needs.  His life will be one of privation.  He will eat little and sleep on the hard floor.  Paradoxically this seemingly poor life, will in actuality be one of great happiness and reward.  The materially deprived Torah scholar will be happy in this world for he will fall so in love with the study of Torah that nothing else will matter.  In the world to come he will be justly rewarded for his efforts. 
Others explain that this mishnah as a warning to the rich, that their delights in worldly pleasures may make it more difficult for them to learn Torah.  For once a person becomes too accustomed to worldly pleasures, that person will need to work harder and harder to earn more money to keep up his extravagant lifestyle. This excessive work will make it impossible for him to learn Torah.  [Note how big of a problem this is still in our society.  People work harder and harder to earn more and more money, yet no matter how much money they have, they are not satisfied.  It is a rare person who finally says, “I have enough” and turns his attention to things more important than earning money.  The people who are able to do so, are often greatly admired by our society, a society which rarely can deny material pleasure.] 
Section two:  The mishnah further warns that even when one has attained the status of being a learned person, he should not exalt himself over others, but rather remain faithful to his humble beginnings.  Similarly, he should not seek honor for himself, meaning he should not learn in order that others will call him “Rabbi”.
Section three:  As great as his learning may be, he must remember to practice more that he has learned.  The goal of learning is not knowledge for its own sake, but practice as well.  We learned this above in chapter three, mishnah nine.  
Section four: The mishnah finishes with a warning, similar to that with which it began.  One should not crave the wealth or power of kings, for the table of Torah is even greater than theirs.  [Some explain this to mean that your reward in the world to come is greater than that of a king].  The crown of Torah is greater than the crown of kingship, as we learned above in chapter four, mishnah thirteen.  Finally, God, who is truly the master (employer) of all human beings, is faithful to pay your reward in the world to come.  While the king never truly knows what awaits him, a righteous Torah scholar can be confident that in the end, he will receive his just due.  
