Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Twelve

Introduction
Hillel and Shammai, the fifth “pair” are probably familiar to many of you, for they were the founders of that two great schools, Beth Shammai (the House of Shammai) and Beth Hillel (the House of Hillel), that truly begin a new era in Jewish history.
Hillel and Shammai lived during Herod’s rule, which began in 37 B.C.E. and lasted until 4 C.E.  Hillel was actually an immigrant from Babylonia.  He is known for his kindness and love of fellow human being.  Many legends exist about Hillel, most of them are about his great humility and love.  

Mishnah Twelve 
Hillel and Shammai received [the oral tradition] from them.
Hillel used to say: be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace, loving mankind and drawing them close to the Torah.

Explanation
According to a legend in Avoth de Rabbi Nathan, when two men had quarreled with each other, Aaron would go and sit down with one of them and say to him:  “My son, mark what your fellow is saying! He beats his breast and tears his clothing, saying, ‘Woe unto me! How shall I lift my eyes and look upon my fellow! I am ashamed before him, for I it is who treated him badly.’”  He would sit with him until he had removed all anger from his heart, and then Aaron would go and sit with the other one and say to him the same thing that he had said to the first. And when the two men met each other they embraced and kissed one another.  
Aaron brought peace between Jews.  A lesson that Jews have learned throughout history, and that they continue to learn today, is that when peace reigns between them, even if they worship idols, they can have their independence.  And when Jews fight with one another, no matter how many commandments they keep, they are easily conquered.  
Hillel also teaches that one should love other people.  Hillel taught that it was much easier to influence people with love than with fear, for love is truly the best motivation in life.  
By acting in such a manner, Aaron was able to draw people closer to Torah.  According to another story about Aaron, he would make a habit of associating with evil people until they grew embarrassed and thought, “Woe unto us!  If Aaron knew what we are like, what our life is like, he would resolve never again to set eye upon us.  He must think we are worthy people.  We ought at least to try to make our conduct correspond to his thinking.”  In that way they would be drawn to association with him and learning Torah from him. 
