Avoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Fourteen

There are four types among those who frequent the study-house (bet midrash): 
He who attends but does not practice: he receives a reward for attendance.   
He who practices but does not attend:  he receives a reward for practice.   
He who attends and practices: he is a pious man;
He who neither attends nor practices: he is a wicked man.

Explanation
“Practice” in this mishnah does not refer to one who does not observe any of the commandments, for the mishnah would not describe such a person as receiving any reward.  Rather, “practice” refers to one who applies himself diligently to his learning.  
He who attends but does not practice: he receives a reward for attendance:  This person goes to the bet midrash to learn, but does not apply himself there and work hard at learning Torah.  What he has learned will probably not stay with him for very long.  Nevertheless, he receives a reward just for making the effort to go.    
He who practices but does not attend:  he receives a reward for practice:  This refers to a person who learns at home but does not attend the bet midrash.  He receives a reward for learning Torah, but he would have received a greater reward had he gone to the bet midrash.  He also would have learned a great deal more had he gone to the bet midrash.
He who attends and practices: he is a pious man:  This person could have learned on his own at home, but in order to set a good example for others and to participate in the community of Torah-learners he attends the bet midrash.  He is considered pious.
He who neither attends nor practices: he is a wicked man:  This person’s contempt for learning Torah makes the mishnah consider him wicked.  
There are other mishnaic commentators who explain that this mishnah does refer to the observance of the commandments.  However, one who does not “practice” does not refer to one who doesn’t practice any of the commandments.  Rather he does not make an effort to learn more about what he should do.  He therefore receives no special reward for his lackadaisical observance, but neither is he considered wicked.  
