Avoth, Chapter Three, Mishnah Nine

Introduction
Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa, the author of this mishnah, was famous for his righteousness and for his close connection to God, a connection so close that God directly answered his prayers.  For instance, the following story is told of him in the Talmud (Berachot 34b):  It happened that Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa went to study Torah with Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai. The son of Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai fell ill. He said to him: Hanina my son, pray for him that he may live. He put his head between his knees and prayed for him and he lived. Said Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai: If Ben Zakkai had stuck his head between his knees for the whole day, no notice would have been taken of him. Said his wife to him: Is Hanina greater than you are? He replied to her: No; but he is like a servant before the king (who has permission to visit the king at any time), and I am like a nobleman before a king (who only visits at appointed times).”  For a further reference see Mishnah Berachot 5:5.
This mishnah clearly reflects Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa’s righteous qualities and his concern with instilling them in others.  

Mishnah Five
Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa said: anyone whose fear of sin precedes his wisdom, his wisdom is enduring, but anyone whose wisdom precedes his fear of sin, his wisdom is not enduring.  
He [also] used to say: anyone whose deeds exceed his wisdom, his wisdom is enduring, but anyone whose wisdom exceeds his deeds, his wisdom is not enduring.

Explanation
Section one:  According to Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa a person who does not fear sin before he begins learning Torah, will not have his learning endure.  In other words, his fear of sin must be what leads him to study and not his study lead him to fear of sin. Rabbi Hanina is saying that the purely intellectual study of Torah, a type of study that does not have an impact on one’s character, will not last.  Maimonides extrapolated this to mean that proper moral behavior will lead to proper intellectual pursuit.  However, one who pursues evil and is a great sinner, but hopes that his study will bring him to better deeds, will not succeed even in his study.  
Others comment on this mishnah that practice of the commandments is what leads to proper belief.  One does not begin practicing Judaism by learning dogma or creed.  One begins by the performance of the commandments and only then follows up with learning about them.
Section two:  This statement is similar to the previous one, except here Rabbi Hanina talks about works and not the fear of sin.  Furthermore, whereas in the previous section he talked about chronological development, here he talks about a quantitative comparison.  A person whose works exceed his knowledge, will retain his knowledge.  However, a person whose knowledge exceeds his works, meaning he knows what he should do but does not carry it out, will in the end not retain his learning.
Note that the worst consequence in these mishnayoth is forgetfulness.  The punishment is not that he will be judged unfavorably by God, but that he will not remember that which he learned.  As I mentioned in the previous mishnah, this is one of the great fears that the rabbis often had.  In a culture where learning is basically oral, the fear of forgetfulness is omnipresent.     
