Avoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Eight

Introduction
This mishnah returns to the list of the “receivers” of the oral tradition.  Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai, who received from Hillel and Shammai, was the patriarch who survived the destruction of the Second Temple and escaped to Yavneh, where he helped the Jewish people continue to exist despite the great trauma they had just suffered.  The legend is told that he escaped the besieged Jerusalem in a coffin and requested that Vespasion, the future Roman emperor, save Yavneh and its sages.  
According to a legend, Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai was the least of Hillel’s 80 students. 
The reason that Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai’s words were not brought in their correct chronological place is that the editor of the Mishnah wanted to first teach all of the words of the descendents of Hillel, who also served as patriarchs.  The Mishnah now returns to Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai and will proceed in subsequent mishnayoth with statements of his students.

Mishnah Eight
Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai received [the oral tradition] from Hillel and Shammai.   
He used to say: if you have learned much torah, do not claim credit for yourself, because for such a purpose were you created.     	
Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai had five disciples and they were these: Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah, Rabbi Yose, the priest, Rabbi Shimon ben Nethaneel and Rabbi Eleazar ben Arach. 
He [Rabbi Johanan] used to list their outstanding virtues:   
Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus is a plastered cistern which loses not a drop;   
Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah — happy is the woman that gave birth to him;   
Rabbi Yose, the priest, is a pious man;   
Rabbi Simeon ben Nethaneel is one that fears sin,   
And Rabbi Eleazar ben Arach is like a spring that [ever] gathers force.  
He [Rabbi Yohanan] used to say: if all the sages of Israel were on one scale of the balance and Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus on the other scale, he would outweigh them all. 
Abba Shaul said in his name: if all the sages of Israel were on one scale of the balance, and Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus also with them, and Rabbi Eleazar ben Arach on the other scale, he would outweigh them all.

Explanation
Section one:  A person should not take credit for himself for learning Torah, but rather should realize that the study of Torah is the purpose of his creation.  This idea is also mentioned in a midrash that teaches that God made a stipulation that if Israel does not study Torah, He will wipe the world out of existence.  Another explanation of this statement is that if a person has learned much Torah, he should not merely give credit to himself, rather he is obligated to teach others.
Section two:  We should note that the first two rabbis on this list, Rabbis Joshua and Eliezer, are two of the most famous rabbis that lived in the generation of the destruction of the Temple and they are found in many places in the mishnah.  The other three rabbis are much less known.  
Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai lists the qualities of each of his five students.  Rabbi Eliezer is known for his fantastic memory.  In general Rabbi Eliezer is known to be an archconservative sage, one whose main goal was to preserve the Torah that he had received from his teachers.  He is not an innovator.  Rabbi Joshua is known for his great kindness, and therefore Rabban Yohanan says how happy his mother must have been.  Rabbi Yose is pious, meaning he goes beyond the letter of the law.  Rabbi Shimon ben Netanel fear sin and distances himself from it by creating “fences” around the Torah.  Rabbi Elazar ben Arach was known for his great intelligence and creativity which made him like an ever-increasing fountain.  Note that this is the contrast to Rabbi Eliezer, the conservative, who appears in the beginning of the list of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai’s students.
Section three:  As noted Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Elazar ben Arach are opposite characters, the first representing conservatism and the second innovation.  The battle between conservatism and innovation was an important ideological struggle during this time in Jewish history, with some claiming that now that the Temple had been destroyed there was a need to concentrate on the preservation of that which was received from previous generations and others claiming that now that the Temple was destroyed innovation was an imperative.  This ideological dispute is borne out in the last section of the mishnah.  According to Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai the conservative sage, Rabbi Eliezer, is the most essential to the Jewish people.  [This is interesting because Rabban Yohanan ben Zakai was known to be a great innovator himself]. Abba Shaul, a later sage, disagrees with this assessment and states that Rabbi Elazar ben Arach, the ever-increasing spring, is the most essential to the survival of the Jewish people and the oral Torah. 
