Avoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
The Mishnah now begins to list things that come in fours.

Mishnah Ten 
There are four types of character in human beings: 
One that says: “mine is mine, and yours is yours”: this is a commonplace type; and some say this is a sodom-type of character. 
[One that says:] “mine is yours and yours is mine”: is an unlearned person (am haaretz);   
[One that says:] “mine is yours is yours is yours” is a pious person.   
[One that says:] “mine is mine, and yours is mine” is a wicked person.

Explanation
One that says: “mine is mine, and yours is yours”: this is a commonplace type:  a person who acts in this way is not pious, for he does not give of his own to others, but neither is he wicked for he is careful not to take others property.
And some say this is a sodom-type of character:  Some say that this is the way that the people of Sodom acted.  When the angelic visitors visited Lot in Sodom, the people of Sodom were angered by Lot’s generosity (Genesis 19:5).  Ezekiel states, “Only this was the sin of your sister Sodom:  arrogance!  She and her daughters had plenty of bread and untroubled tranquility; yet she did not support the poor and the needy” (Ezekiel 16:49).  We see that one of the cardinal crimes of the people of Sodom was their lack of generosity, especially when contrasted with the generosity and hospitality of Abraham.
The commentators also point out that one who does not want to give of himself to others will eventual never want to give anything to others, even if it costs him nothing. 
[One that says:] “mine is yours and yours is mine”: is an unlearned person (am haaretz):  One explanation is that this literally refers to the “am haaretz”, which literally translates as the “people of the land”, who live in partnership on the land.  There is no concept of ownership amongst this type of people, and therefore they don’t recognize any border between what is theirs and what belongs to others.  In a positive manner, we could state that they share everything equally.  Others explain this as having a negative connotation, and “am haaretz” refers to an uncivilized, unlearned, almost barbaric people.  
[One that says:] “mine is yours is yours is yours” is a pious person:  A person who does not want to ever take of others’ property but does want to give to others is truly pious, for he gives without expecting anything in return.     
[One that says:] “mine is mine, and yours is mine” is a wicked person:  He is wicked for he wishes to take and not give anything in return.  


