Avoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Two

Introduction
Mishnah two continues to provides things that came in ten in the Bible and that teach lessons about God.  This mishnah contains a highly schematic version of history.  In other words, history and its length are divided into equal periods and in those equal periods we can detect God’s directing hand at work.  This type of learning from history and from its division into equal periods was extremely prevalent in ancient Judaism both amongst the rabbis and amongst other sects of Jews.

Mishnah Two
[There were] ten generations from Adam to Noah, in order to make known what long-suffering is His; for all those generations kept on provoking Him, until He brought upon them the waters of the flood.
[There were] ten generations from Noah to Abraham, in order to make known what long-suffering is His; for all those generations kept on provoking Him, until Abraham, came and received the reward of all of them.

Explanation
Section one:  Although all of the generations between Adam and Noah were evil, God did not destroy them immediately.  He put up with their provocation until the tenth generation, when He decided to destroy the world with a flood.  In God’s long-suffering we can learn a lesson of patience and forgiveness.  Even though in the end God did decide to destroy the world, He did not do so immediately, but gave the world a chance to repent.  We also, by the way, learn that God will not tolerate provocation forever; He will eventually bring judgment.  Jewish commentators in the Middle Ages found in this comfort, for they lived under terrible oppression at the hands of the Muslims and especially the Christians.  A Jew should not despair, for God will eventually punish them for their evil acts.
Section two:  This section is a little more difficult to explain, for what does the phrase, “Abraham came and received the reward of all of them” mean.  Rashi explains that Abraham received the reward that they would have received had they repented.  Others explain that based upon the merit of Abraham God did not destroy again the whole world. Abraham taught them that repentance was possible and therefore God did not destroy the world.  A third explanation is that Abraham received the reward that they all would have received had they learned from him the principles of monotheism.  
