Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Seventeen

Introduction
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel the elder, who is referred to in this mishnah as “Shimon, his (Rabban Gamaliel the elder’s) son” was the head of the Sanhedrin at the time of the destruction of the Temple.  Perhaps the reason that he is referred to here as “his son” and not with the title “Rabban” is that he made these statement while he was younger.  There are very few statements in the Mishnah that were made by this sage.  (This is not the same sage that will appear in the next mishnah).  
Note that this is the first case in Avoth where a son’s statements follow his fathers.  Most rabbis did not inherit their positions from their fathers.  The notable exceptions are the patriarchs who did bequeath their titles to their sons.

Mishnah Seventeen
Shimon, his son, used to say: all my days I grew up among the sages, 
and I have found nothing better for a person than silence. 
Study is not the most important thing, but actions; 
whoever indulges in too many words brings about sin.

Explanation
Shimon makes three statements, all of which clearly have a common element.  A person should say little and do much, which is basically the same lesson taught by Shammai in mishnah fifteen above.  [Perhaps Shimon’s praise of silence might explain why so few of his statements were preserved.  Maybe he didn’t say all that much!]
There are different ways of understanding Shimon’s praise of silence.  One understanding is that when others verbally abuse you, the best defense is to remain silent.  I realize that this is controversial advice, and certainly sometimes it is not best to just be quiet.  But certainly there are times when it is best to “hold one’s peace” and not respond to the other person with more verbal abuse.  Everyone knows that in a shouting match neither side wins.  Often the best strategy at defusing a difficutl situation is to gather one’s inner strength and remain quiet.  
Another understanding of Shimon’s first statement is that a silent person might be considered intelligent, even if he is not.  Whereas the more an intelligent person talks, the more foolish he will often be considered.
There were many debates amongst the rabbis about what was greater, study or action.  Shimon clearly sides with action, for a person who learns but does not fulfill the commandments of which he is learning, might as well not have learned.  According to Shimon the purpose of study is action.  [Note that he does not discount the value of study, but rather the value of study without action].
On the last statement of Shimon, Rabbenu Jonah, a medieval Spanish commentator makes an interesting note.  People have two ears and only one tongue.  This is to teach that a person should hear twice as much as what he says.


