Avoth, Chapter Four, Mishnah Ten

Introduction
Rabbi Meir was one of the great students of Rabbi Akiva, and according to the Talmud, the anonymous sayings in the mishnah were really stated by Rabbi Meir.  In other words, when Rabbi Judah Hanasi composed the mishnah, he used Rabbi Meir’s mishnah as the base.  

Mishnah Ten
Rabbi Meir said: 
Engage but little in business, and busy yourself with the Torah.   
Be of humble spirit before all men.   
If you have neglected the Torah, you shall have many who bring you to neglect it,   but if you have labored at the study of Torah, there is much reward to give unto you

Explanation
Section one:  A story is told of Rabbi Meir, that he earned three sela’s a week.  One he would spend on food, one on clothing and one he would give to support other scholars.  When asked why he was leaving nothing for his children as an inheritance, he replied that if they are righteous, they will merit their own living and if they are wicked, why should he leave his belongings to God’s enemies.  This story illustrates well Rabbi Meir’s faith that God would help provide for those who learn Torah.  Note that Rabbi Meir works for a living; he does not himself accept charity nor solely depend on God’s provenance.  Furthermore he recognizes that although he can earn a living while studying, others are not so successful.  God’s aid is not forthcoming to all and therefore he gives charity.   While he has faith that in the end God will provide, his faith does not prevent him from taking action.
Section two:  A person should act humbly in front of all other human beings, not just those who are superior to him.  This is also true (or perhaps especially true) for those who are learned in Torah.  Although they are more learned than others, they must act humbly in front of all people.
Section three:  If a person neglects the study of Torah, there will continuously be things that further prevent him from studying Torah.  This can easily be observed.  When someone postpones doing something, be it study, exercise or any activity that can be postponed, it only gets more and more difficult to find the time to engage in that activity.  However, if one does start to study, Rabbi Meir has faith that he will receive a rich reward.  The commentators understand this to mean that God himself will reward such a person.  
