Avoth, Chapter Two, Mishnah Thirteen

Mishnah Thirteen
Rabbi Shimon said: 
Be careful with the reading of Shema and the prayer,    
And when you pray, do not make your prayer something automatic, but a plea for compassion before God, for it is said: “for he is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, abounding in kindness, and renouncing punishment” (Joel 2:13);    
And be not wicked in your own esteem.

Explanation
Be careful with the reading of Shema and the prayer:  the “Shema” and the “prayer” which is known today as the “amidah” or the “shmoneh esreh” are the two central elements to Jewish prayer.  The “Shema” consists of Deuteronomy 6:4-9, 11:13-21, and Numbers 15:37-41.  It is recited in the morning and in the evening.  The “prayer” is recited three times a day on weekdays, four times a day on Shabbat and holidays mentioned in the Torah, and five times on Yom Kippur.  It contains praises of God and requests.  Rabbi Shimon teaches that a person should be careful to say these things the correct number of times and at the right time of day.        
And when you pray, do not make your prayer something automatic, but a plea for compassion before God:  this statement balances out the previous statement.  One must be careful to recite prayers at the correct times but prayer can nevertheless not become automatic.  It must be a genuine plea for compassion before God, and not a mere recital of words that someone else composed.  This is the great challenge of Jewish prayer:  it has strict laws as to what must be said and when, and yet it is supposed to be a spontaneous outpouring from a person’s heart.  The idea of spontaneous/fixed prayer and the tension between the two is one of the most unique aspects of Jewish prayer.
And be not wicked in your own esteem:  do not do something which you yourself know to be wrong, though others do not recognize the truth.  Another interpretation is that a person should not regard himself as wicked, for that will lead to despair.  A person should look upon himself as half-wicked, half-good; far from perfection but close enough to having his good side outweigh his bad side.  In this way he will always be motivated to do one more good deed, to “put himself over the top”.   
According to Maimonides this teaches that if a man thinks of himself as mean, he will not hesitate to act mean to others.  Having a positive image of oneself helps one be a better person.    
