Avoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Seven

Introduction
In what may or may not be a coincidence, the seventh mishnah of our chapter begins to list things that come in sevens.

Mishnah Seven
[There are] seven things [characteristic] in a clod, and seven in a wise man: 
A wise man does not speak before one who is greater than he in wisdom,   
And does not break into his fellow’s speech; 
And is not hasty to answer;   
He asks what is relevant, and he answers to the point;   
And he speaks of the first [point] first, and of the last [point] last;
And concerning that which he has not heard, he says: I have not heard;   
And he acknowledges the truth.   
And the reverse of these [are characteristic] in a clod.

Explanation 
Our mishnah lists the differences between a “clod” and a wise man.  According to Maimonides a “clod” is a person in whom are to be found moral and intellectual virtues, but in state of incompleteness, and not functioning properly.  That is why he is called a clod; he is like an implement beginning to take shape in the hands of a craftsman, but still lacking completion.  
The mishnah lists the qualities of the wise man and then at the end tells us that the opposite is true for the clod.  Note that many of these qualities are important in the learning of Torah.  In other words, the mishnah is discussing the type of behavior that is most appropriate for inside the bet midrash, the rabbinic study hall.  Also, many of the qualities are important in a learning environment that is all oral, without books, as learning was during the time of the Mishnah.  In an “oral” culture, properly organized speech is a highly regarded quality.
Some of these qualities are self-explanatory, so we will only explain those which require some clarification.     
And does not break into his fellow’s speech:  it is extremely important to wait to fully hear what your fellow has said, lest by interrupting him you distract his train of thought or ask a question that will be answered later.  
And is not hasty to answer: the wise man must consider his answer before he gives it, for others will take his words quite seriously.  
He asks what is relevant, and he answers to the point:  Asking what is relevant means that when discussing one subject, for instance the laws of Sabbath observance, he doesn’t ask about another subject, such as the laws of prayer.  He answers to the point means that the wise man does not give long-winded arguments that others will not understand.   
And he speaks of the first [point] first, and of the last [point] last:  In an oral culture, organized speech is easiest to remember and is therefore most effective.  
And concerning that which he has not heard, he says: I have not heard:  This does not mean that he admits that he doesn’t know the answer to something.  The mishnah is stating that if he has reasoned out an answer to a question on his own, but does not have a tradition as to what the right answer is, he must admit that his answer is based upon reason and not tradition.  In the eyes of many of the rabbis tradition was a stronger criterion in determining points of law than reason.
And he acknowledges the truth:  If he realizes he has lost an argument, he admits it  
And the reverse of these [are characteristic] in a clod.
