Avoth, Chapter Five, Mishnah Twenty

Introduction
From the fact that this mishnah ends in a short prayer, it can be concluded that it was originally the last mishnah in the tractate.  The remaining mishnayoth in this chapter, and all of chapter six are addenda added in post-Mishnaic times (I will discuss chapter six later).  
Judah ben Tema is not mentioned anywhere else in the Mishnah.

Mishnah Twenty  
Judah ben Tema said: Be strong as a leopard, and swift as an eagle, and fleet as a gazelle, and brave as a lion, to do the will of your Father who is in heaven.   
He used to say: the arrogant is headed for Gehinnom and the blushing for the garden of Eden.   
May it be the will, O Lord our God, that your city be rebuilt speedily in our days and set our portion in the studying of your Torah.

Explanation
Section one:  Judah ben Tema uses images that are taken from the animal world.  He at first seems to be making statements about a man’s physical strength.  These statements would sound more appropriate in the Greek gymnasium than in the rabbinic study house.  It is only at the end of his statement that we learn that these physical attributes are to be used for following God’s will and not for human glory.  
Strong like a leopard—to stand up against people who denounce those who observe the Torah.  Others say that this refers to the strength needed to rebuke those who don’t observe the commandments.  
Swift as an eagle—to run away from sin.  Others say this refers to ministering to Torah scholars, which should be performed with great speed.  
Fleet as a gazelle—to perform the commandments.  Others say that this refers to moving to a place where one can study Torah.  
Brave as a lion—to conquer one’s evil inclination.  Others say that this refers to getting up at night to learn Torah.  
Section two:  The word “arrogant” in Hebrew is the same word used in section one to mean “strong”.  Although one should be strong, this is only so if the strength is used for holy purposes, for the sake of Heaven.  However, arrogance, which is unjustified demonstrations of strength, leads one to despise those who might legitimately criticize him.  An arrogant person will not check his deeds to make sure that he is acting correctly.
One who is embarrassed and blushes at his mistakes, will learn from them and will not continue to sin.  Judaism does not seek out perfection, but rather moral progress.  One who is capable of such embarrassment will, in the end, inherit the garden of Eden.
Section three:  According to the Rambam, after having spoken of the virtue of blushing, the mishnah utters a prayer:  O our God, even as in Your grace You have bestowed upon us this virtue, so be gracious unto us and have Your city rebuilt speedily in our days.  
