Avoth, Chapter One, Mishnah Eighteen

Introduction
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel in this mishnah is not the same Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel that we saw in the previous mishnah, but rather his grandson, the son of Rabban Gamaliel of Yavneh. He was the patriarch after the Bar Kokhba revolt (132-135 C.E.).  He lived in the Gallilee, which became the center of Judaism after the revolt.  Many of his statements appear in the mishnah. He was the father of Rabbi Judah Hanasi, who edited the Mishnah..  

Mishnah Eighteen
Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel used to say: on three things does the world stand:   
On justice, on truth and on peace, as it is said: “execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates” (Zechariah 8:16).

Explanation 
Note how close this mishnah is in style to mishnah two in the beginning of the chapter.  This is surely not accidental.  The editor of the mishnah chose to begin and end a unit with similar language and style, perhaps to aid in memory.  This type of literary structure is not unusual in the mishnah.
However, there may be some differences between the two mishnayoth.  Some versions of our mishnah read “does the world exist” and not “stand”.  The Meiri comments that the difference is that in mishnah two, Shimon the Righteous, taught three things without which the world would crumble: the Torah, the Temple service, and the practice of acts of piety.  Our mishnah teaches things without which the world could stand but the political/societal structure would fall apart.  Without justice, truth and peace, the world be anarchical, full of danger.  
Justice:  the Rabbis also stated that any judge who judges correctly is a partner with God in creation.  Creating a just world is one of the responsibilities of all human beings, Jew and non-Jew alike.
Truth:  Some commentators understand this as speaking truthfully to one’s fellow human being.  Others understand this as a recognition of God.  
Peace:  Without peace, even if a person has personal wealth and all of the material things he needs, he will not be able to enjoy them, for war will tear apart his life.  Proper Torah study is also impossible to fulfill in times of strife and war.  This statement can also be understood as peace between the people of Israel, as was learned in mishnah twelve.
The Palestinian Talmud comments that these are all actually connected.  If there is justice, there will be truth and if there are truth and justice there will be peace. That is why all three are learned from one verse.     


